a	pos	IPA	oh!	"particle; expresses surprise; a, taawa ‘oh, there it is’; a, ima aviituq ‘oh, it's not there anymore’"	а
aa1	pos	IPA	darn!	particle; pronounced with breathy voice to indicate exasperation	ā1
"aa2, aa-a"	pos	IPA	yes	particle; an expression of approval or agreement; aanaqsiin? ‘are you going out?’ -- aa ‘yes’	"ā2, ā-а"
aafkagh-	pos	IPA	to burst	"aafkaghtuq ‘it burst’; aafkaghaa ‘he burst it’ / Maalghuk ighuk ugugnaghaam ighukek neghumakek. Taagken aghnam pimakanga, aqsanga kenegraamaan, ""Kaay aqsan aafkaghllequq."" ‘He ate two legs, hind-quarters of the shrew. Then the woman said to him, while poking at his stomach, “Hey, your stomach will burst.” (UNGIPAGHAGH. 80)"	āфкаӷ-
aafkaneghlluk	pos	IPA	durable material that will not burst	No information given.	āфканыҳльюк
aafqugh-	pos	IPA	to set things aside; to divide things into groups	No information given.	āфқуӷ-
aafte-	pos	IPA	to separate from others	"aaftuq ‘he separated himself from the others’; aaftaa ‘he separated it from the others, took it from where it was, put it aside’ / aafutut ‘they separated from each other’; = afte-"	āфты-
aag-	pos	IPA	to take a side trip	"aagtuq ‘he made a side trip’; aagaa ‘he went over to it while on his way to somewhere else’ / aagvik ‘the place to which one makes a side trip’; Sangwaa taakwagun aagaqegkan, tuqutaqigu. ‘If something happens to come by  this way, kill it.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 62)"	āг-
aaga-	pos	IPA	to swing	"aagaaq ‘it swung’ / aagastaa ‘he made it swing’, ‘he pushed her on the swing’; Aagastaqa qevulliighaatekestaamaan aagalghiinaakun. ‘I began to push her on the swing a little more with each back and forth swinging motion.’ (SULUWET 16)"	āга-
aageste- 	pos	IPA	to prolong one's action for a long time; to moan long and mournfully 	"aagestuq ‘he let out a long moan or kept his action going for a long time’ / qinuyulghii aagestaataghtuq unulqusiq elngaatall ‘the sick one let out long painful cries throughout the night’; mekelghiighhaq aagestaataghtuq qiyatkelluku ‘the little boy prolonged his wailing as he cried’; qepghallghegni aaghestaak yugem taawa ‘oh my, the man is keeping at his work for as long as he can’"	āгысты-
aaggaatae	pos	IPA	whetstone; sharpening stone	No information given.	āхāтаы
aaggagh-	pos	IPA	to sharpen; to whet	No information given.	āхаӷ-
aaggnaqe-	pos	IPA	to use sparingly; to economize	No information given.	āхньақы-
aaghhaghte-	pos	IPA	to move a little by force; to budge; to change one's mind; for there to be an earthquake	"aaghhaghtuq ‘it budged, he changed his mind’; aaghhaghtaa ‘he budged it, he changed her mind’ / nuna aaghhaghtuq ‘the ground moved, there was an earthquake’; nguutnguga alangqughiitama aaghhaghluku ilefkaghaghsimaaqa ‘I made the stone in my ring come loose and fall out’; aaghhaghsaghqaghhaanghilnguq yuuk qenwatlu taawa malikruutesimaat ‘they finally persuaded that very stubborn man to go along with their ideas’"	āҳаҳты-
aaghhe-	pos	IPA	"to move freely (as a rope being pulled, or a person's behavior); to slacken"	aaghhuq ‘it (rope) is running free; he (person) is not being restrained nor restraining himself’ / aaghhestaa ‘he is letting it run free’; aaghhestaa uyiiq aghveq awatmun igleghsan ‘he let the whale rope flow out as the whale moved away’; aaghhuq yuuk taana qepghaqamini avelghaqiinaghluki ilani piyukellghinaghmitun ‘that man is getting away with doing whatever he wishes with complete disregard for his co-workers’; aaghhestaat taana taghnughhaq elngaatall ‘they certainly are giving that child free rein’	āҳы-
aaghheghneq	pos	IPA	person that can easily be persuaded	No information given.	āҳыӷнық
aaghhneghlliqe-	pos	IPA	to be stubborn	Tawaten ataasimi aghneghmi Kiiluuq aaghhneghlliqumalghii esnamun samavek elqwaaghyaghnaluni.’ Then one day Kiiluuq being stubborn went down to the shore to gather seaweed.’ (KIILUUQ 3)	āҳньыҳльиқы-
aaghhneghlluk	pos	IPA	one who is hard to convince; stubborn person; skeptical person	No information given.	āҳньыҳльюк
aaghhutagh-	pos	IPA	to move by crawling over thin ice	piyaalghii iikusati aaghhutameng aghviimalghii ‘the man who was hunting by foot crossed by drawling  over the thing ice when the cake of ice he was on broke off from the main ice	āҳутаӷ-
aaghhwe-	pos	IPA	to crawl	"aaghhuq or aaghhwuq ‘he crawled’; aaghhwaa ‘he crawled over it’ / aaghhwaaghtuq ‘he keeps crawling’; Repall atanga aaghhweregaghmeng aanumalghii, llangaqa pingayuneng ighukelghii. ‘The father went out crawling, looking like he had three legs.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 72)"	āҳӱы-
aaghlu	pos	IPA	fireball of some sort coming down from mountains (perhaps meteor or comet)	traditionally thought to be connected with a creature dwelling in the rocks behind Gambell; the color is said to be prophetic	āӷлю
aaghqaghte-1	pos	IPA	to take a route different from usual; to detour; to avoid; to evade; to put rope around or across something	aaghqaghtuq ‘he went a different way’; aaghqaghtaa ‘he didn’t stop at it’ / taagagun aaghqaghsimaaq ‘he went by the far side instead’; aaghqaghtaa tapghaq ‘he put the rope around that part’	āҳқаҳты-1
aaghqaghte-2	pos	IPA	to urge; to encourage	aaghqaghtuq ‘he went a different way’; aaghqaghtaa ‘he didn’t stop at it’ / taagagun aaghqaghsimaaq ‘he went by the far side instead’; aaghqaghtaa tapghaq ‘he put the rope around that part’	āҳқаҳты-2
aaghqutaate-	pos	IPA	to detour; to decide for someone without giving him a say	aaghqutaatestegpenasi seghletun pinaqelghiinun ‘don't let them tell you what to do when they are doing wrong’	āҳқутāты-
aaghqutaq	pos	IPA	a certain ball game	Chukotkan; called kalleghta by most people on St. Lawrence Island	āҳқутақ
aaghqute-	pos	IPA	to comply with the wishes of another	aaghqutaa ‘he did as she wanted’ /	āҳқуты-
aaghsi	pos	IPA	thong holding shank (giimaq) to harpoon shaft	#NAME?	āҳси
aaghte-1	pos	IPA	to move a little; to budge; to change one's mind; for there to be an earthquake	No information given.	āҳты-1
aaghte-2	pos	IPA	to convince	aaghtaa ‘he convinced her’/	āҳты-2
aaghtiiraagh-	pos	IPA	to argue	No information given.	āҳтӣрāӷ-
aaghw-	pos	IPA	upside down	postural root; aaghwtuq ‘it turned upside down’; aaghwtaa ‘he turned it upside down’; aaghwngaaq ‘it is upside down’; qayuutat ayumiq aaghwtaaghtestesnanighaqiit ‘long ago they discouraged people from leaving wooden platters upside down’ (probably a superstition)	āӷӱ-
aaghwqe-	pos	IPA	to get bloody	aaghwquq ‘he got bloody’; aaghwqaa ‘he got it bloody’ /	āӷӱқы-
aaghwtaq	pos	IPA	tent with a arched roof; wooden house type with arched roof covered with hide	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	āӱҳтақ
aagna	pos	IPA	that one over there; that one going away	"extended demonstrative pronoun; base: ag-; localis singular pronoun: agum ‘at the one over there’; vocative singular:  aagyuq ‘you, going away’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: aagkut ‘those over there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: taagna ‘that one over there’; adverbial particle: aga ‘over there!’; localis adverb: agani ‘over there’; terminalis adverb: agavek ‘to over there’; vialis adverb: aaggun ‘through over there’; ablative adverb: aagken ‘from over there’; anaphoric adverbial particle: taaga ‘there, over there!’; aagna qilaga pinipigta ‘how nice the sky looks over there!’; aagna uyavaq meq imaghllugituq taaga ‘the sea farther up beyond us is not rough at all’; aagna yuuk angvigapigta ‘how tall that person who is going away is!’; aagna igleghlleghhii qemimelnguq yugaa? ‘is that thing moving up on that hill a person?’"	āгна
aagneghaghte-	pos	IPA	to split at the crotch	aagneghaghtuk ‘they2 (pants) split at the crotch’; aagneghaghtaak ‘he split them2 at the crotch’ /	āгныӷаҳты-
aagneghtu-	pos	IPA	to have long steps; to have a long stride	No information given.	āгныҳту-
aagneq	pos	IPA	crotch of pants; one pace; one step	"used in the dual, aagneghek, for one crotch"	āгнық
aagra	pos	IPA	"insulated inner room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	"Aagram ilungi puqlaghllagulghiit, aghnat ilungani raarwiighesnaghluteng ayuqelghiit sungighluteng, tangyeghusighluteng, tukughusighluteng. ‘Because inside the inner room women are quite warm they wear only underwear plus beads, bracelets and anklets.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:33); aagra is termed polog ‘bed canopy’ in Russian"	āгра
aagralghun	pos	IPA	"guyline at corner of the aagra, the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	No information given.	āгралӷун
aagriin	pos	IPA	"ridgepole supporting the aagra, the insulatedinner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	No information given.	āгрӣн
aagtagh-	pos	IPA	to shoot at even though from a distance	neghsaq nuulghii aatak aagtaghyaghaqa ‘I tried shooting at the seal even though it was far away’	āхтаӷ-
aagte-1	pos	IPA	to prolong one's action	= aageste-	āхты-1
aagte-2	pos	IPA	to stumble; to trip	= naagte-	āхты-2
aagte-3	pos	IPA	to keep something secret; to let something pass without mentioning it	No information given.	āхты-3
aagute-	pos	IPA	to bump into something; to make a side trip for (it)	"aagutuq ‘he bumped into something’; aagutaa ‘he bumped into it’, ‘he made a side trip for it’ /"	āгуты-
aagyug-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root: > aagyugneq, aagyugniqe-, aagyugteste-"	āгьюг-
aagyugneq	pos	IPA	persistent person	aagyugneghutmineng qepghaqanguq ‘he landed himself a job due to his being a persistent person’	āгьюгнық
aagyugniqe-	pos	IPA	to be stubborn or persistent	No information given.	āгьюгниқы-
aagyugteste-	pos	IPA	to make (him) stubborn; to provoke	ugumiyugsaghluku milughmilghii aagyugtestaa ‘he provoked him so he continued to throw rocks’	āгьюхтысты-
aagyugutke-	pos	IPA	to pick on	aagyugutkaa ‘he picked on him’ / alingtalghii aagyugutkaat alingseghaghaqluku ‘they picked on the person who is easily frightened by trying to scare him’	āгьюгуткы-
aahaaleketiiq	pos	IPA	a game involving coiled lines drawn on the ground which one follows from the outside inward as a particular song is sung	No information given.	āгāлыкытӣқ
aahaangwliq	pos	IPA	oldsquaw duck (Clangula hyemalis); the cry of the oldsquaw	"the true name of the oldsquaw is said to be kangghwaak, while the present word is a sort of nickname based on the cry of the oldsquaw"	āгāӱңлиқ
aakaq*	pos	IPA	older sister of female	No information given.	āкақ
aakw	pos	IPA	blood	"aawa ‘his blood’, aakwa ‘my blood’; aawuuq ‘it is blood’; see also aaw- ‘to bleed’"	āӱк
aakwrak	pos	IPA	small spot or streak of blood	No information given.	āӱкшак
aalghaq	pos	IPA	another family in the same clan; the other of a pair of boats cooperating in a hunt; hunting partner; second wife	No information given.	āлӷақ
Aallgha aghneq	pos	IPA	Monday	the name comes from Monday being the second day of the week	А̄льҳа аӷнық
aallgutaq	pos	IPA	broom; besom; wing of bird used as a broom	Chukotkan (R); may be used in the plural for a single broom	āльхутақ
aallneq	pos	IPA	ember; soot with grease from an oil lamp	No information given.	āльньық
aallngunaan	pos	IPA	without a partner	irregular subordinative of aallghite- (rather than aallghinaan or aallghunaan)	āльңьунāн
aalma	pos	IPA	block of snow to be used in a heated house	perhaps to cool the house (?)	āлма
aalqullghiik	pos	IPA	pair; couple; person and companion	No information given.	āльқульҳӣк
aam	pos	IPA	"hesitation sound like English ""aah"" or ""um"""	particle	āм
aamak	pos	IPA	a kind of berry	exact identification undetermined	āмак
aamna	pos	IPA	that one over there; the one across the sea; that one on the other side of something; that one over the mountains; that one in the other room	"obscured demonstrative pronoun; base: am-; localis singular pronoun: amumi ‘in the one on the other side’; vocative singular: aamyuq ‘you, on the other side’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: aamkut ‘those on the other side’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: taamna ‘that one on the other side’; adverbial particle: ama ‘over there (on the other side)!’; localis adverb: amani ‘on the other side’; terminalis adverb: amavek ‘to the other side’; vialis adverb: amagun or aamggun ‘through the other side’; ablative adverb: amaken or aamken ‘from the other side’; anaphoric adverbial particle: taama ‘there, on the other side!’"	āмна
aamqun	pos	IPA	welt put in between the boot sole and the upper on a skin-boot	Aamqutnguut nateghqamllu amiiramllu akulanganilnguut …. ‘There was a welt [put] between the sole and upper [of the boot] ….’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:114) 	āмқун
aamta	pos	IPA	as we know from our experience; as we well understand	"particle; aamta ellngitlu aghneghmi amighinaqaqeftut whangkutestun ‘they are putting a skin on their boat today just as we are’; aamta ellngitlu seghleliightut taawa ‘oh, they are grieving greatly (a feeling we understand all too well)’; Mekelghiighuluteng, apangiighhaghputlu aagna, apangiighhaghputlu aamta entaqun seghleghllugumayaghtuq.  ‘Being boys, our little grandfather too, that one, our little grandfather also, as we know maybe he would try to be bad (be mischievous).’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:24)"	āмта
aamtaam	pos	IPA	if that can't be; if that isn't so; if that is so; that being the case	"particle; tawani tagilghaaten utaqanaaghamken taawanginaq enkaam aamtaam pipagningiskuvek ungipaannakevnga kitukun ‘come at that time and I'll wait for you, but if you can't, let me know through someone’; tagilghaaten, aamtaam wiin piyunghilkuvek taginghisaghngaaghpek ‘do come over, but if you don't want to, then don't’; taginghisaghngaaghpek aamtaam tagiyukuvek tagilghaaten ‘you don't have to come, but if you want to come, then come’; Aamtaam eltughaanka pillgitngwaaghtut. ‘That being so, my grandchildren treasure the things they have.’ (Sivuq. Nangagh. 3:94); Taawanginaq whanganginanghitunga, anengalguunga. Aamtaam ighlekegkaanganga ugiighnaanghitunga. Aamtaam aangqanganga ugiighllequnga. ‘It’s not only me, I have an older brother. That being the case, if he doesn’t let me I won’t marry you. That being the case, if he does agree I will marry you.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20)"	āмтāм
aamtawha	pos	IPA	maybe; probably; trying fruitlessly	particle; aamtawha kiigunneghatni quugmeng suyvaghtuq imawha uksungani naangut ‘he would try to gather enough wood during the summer but would run out in the winter’	āмтаӱьа
aamtayaghhaq	pos	IPA	how well we know	"particle, like aamta (q.v.) but stronger"	āмтаяҳақ
aane-	pos	IPA	to go out(side)	aanuq ‘he went out’; aanaa ‘he went out of it or went out through it / aanutaa he took it out’	āны-
aanelgun	pos	IPA	littermate; one born at the same time; a person's contemporary	No information given.	āнылгун
aanesqe-	pos	IPA	to drive out; to expel; to force somebody to leave	Chukotkan (R)	āнысқы-
aanestaghagh-	pos	IPA	to press or squeeze out; to put or thrust out	Chukotkan (R)	āныстаӷаӷ-
aangaayugte-	pos	IPA	to act as if superior to others; to put on airs; to act conceited	No information given.	āңāюхты-
aange-	pos	IPA	to be big; to be large	aanguq ‘it is big’	āңы-
aangeghllak	pos	IPA	big thing; large thing	No information given.	āңыҳльяк
aanghuute-	pos	IPA	to spark as from friction; to make sparks	aanghuutuq ‘it made sparks’ / Uyghagami qamiyegka aanghuutuk igleghsama.’ My sled made sparks as I was going over the rocks.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 5)	āнӷӯты-
aangqagh-	pos	IPA	to play ball	No information given.	āңқаӷ-
Aangqaghvik	pos	IPA	June; July	No information given.	А̄ңқаӷвик
aangqanneq	pos	IPA	traditional ball game	Chukotkan (V&E)	āңқаньық
aangqaq	pos	IPA	ball	No information given.	āңқақ
"aangqasiigh-, aangqasi-"	pos	IPA	"to get ready to throw a ball; to ""wind up"""	No information given.	"āңқасӣӷ-, āңқаси-"
aangqengwaaq	pos	IPA	small rattle	Chukotkan (R)	āңқыңӱāқ
aangwaagh-	pos	IPA	"to be rather big,  big enough"	Chukotkan (R)	āңӱāӷ-
aangwunani	pos	IPA	"(he, she or it) being bloodless"	No information given.	āңӱунани
aanighte-	pos	IPA	to concentrate thought and action on what one is doing	aanightuq ‘he is concentrating on what he is doing’ / aanighutaa ‘he is concentrating on it’; cf. anighte-	āниҳты-
aanleghaate-	pos	IPA	to leave a building; to rise to the surface	Chukotkan (R)	āнлыӷāты-
aanleghagh-	pos	IPA	to seep out; to flow out	aanleghaghtuq ‘it seeped out’ / Kagimkaq qantamineng aanleghaghtuq reghilleghqun. ‘Sugar is leaking out of the its container through a hole.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 5)	āнлыӷаӷ-
aanngerquq	pos	IPA	ankle bone	Chukotkan;  = angangarquq	āнңышқуқ
aanqaghneq	pos	IPA	bulge; protrusion	No information given.	āнқаӷнық
aanqaghreki	pos	IPA	the number three (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"cf. aangqaq; the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	āңқаӷрыки
aanqaghte-	pos	IPA	to rush out; to protrude; to bulge	"aanqaghtuq ‘he rushed out’, ‘it protruded’ /"	āнқаҳты-
aanqaghtivike-	pos	IPA	to hit accidentally as with a stone from a sling	Chukotkan (R)	āнқаҳтывикы-
aanqulleq	pos	IPA	manure	Chukotkan (R)	āнқульық
aanqutagh-	pos	IPA	to lead singing	No information given.	āнқутаӷ-
aanqute-	pos	IPA	to start singing or speaking	"aanqutaa ‘he began (to say, sing) i’t / aanqutiiq ‘he began to sing’; yugem aanqutisaghaanga kaallunga ‘the man began to say something as he reached me’; Ellngan quunpeng aanqutaqii atuutet atulghiini. ‘He always starts the songs for the singers.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 6); cf. aane-"	āнқуты-
aantaq	pos	IPA	midden; dump	"may be used in the plural, aantat, for one midden"	āнтақ
aante-	pos	IPA	to to take out; to bring out; to put out; to give birth to	aantaa ‘he brought it out’ / aantiiq ‘he took something out (particularly a commode for dumping)’; pegnem aantaa ighneni ‘she had a difficult time giving birth to her son’	āнты-
aanvik	pos	IPA	outlet; exit	No information given.	āнвик
aanyaghagh-	pos	IPA	to go out early	No information given.	āньяӷаӷ-
aanyaghaq1	pos	IPA	"first one out; first-born child; man who goes outside the first (in the morning); first letter of word, initial"	No information given.	āньяӷақ1
aanyaghaq2	pos	IPA	exit; the way out; outlet	"also used in the dual, aanyaghak, for one exit or outlet; qaltak aanyaghametuk ‘the bucket is by the exit; kiiwem aanyaghakek uusqaghtuk ‘the water is deep around the outlet of the river’"	āньяӷақ2
aanziigh-	pos	IPA	to burp; to belch	"aanziightuq ‘he burped’; Aanziighllagyalghiimi sayalghiimi, mighyaghllagyalghiimi taghnughhaam akileghteghllagluku, qiyateghllaget. ‘When it (the creature) belched, doubled over, and threw up violently, the children tumbled out from it crying loudly.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:174)"	āнзӣӷ-
aanziiq	pos	IPA	a burp; a belch	No information given.	āнзӣқ
aapghun	pos	IPA	object which is to be sacrificed; prediction	Chukotkan (R)	āпҳун
aapte-	pos	IPA	to ask	aaptuq ‘he asked’; aaptaa ‘he asked her’ /	āпты-
aapute-	pos	IPA	to ask permission; to ask concerning someone or something	"aaputuq ‘he asked for permission’; aaputaa ‘he asked her for permission’; Ungazighmiit aaputaqut ellmengllu Arctic Ocean-mun pinaluteng. ‘The Siberians would ask permission (to join), wanting to go to the Arctic Ocean.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:118)"	āпуты-
aaqun	pos	IPA	almost	"particle; yuuk sikugni piyugluni aaqun meghquutkaaguq ‘a man walking on the ice practically fell into the water’; Taana ivenrumeng kaatevzighaghput, aaqun kaasimaaghput iitek. ‘We almost reached that one with the outboarrd motor; almost, we got to it, indeed.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:34)"	āқун
aaqunqun	pos	IPA	try it anyway; dare	particle	āқунқун
aarragh-	pos	IPA	to dress in fancy clothes	aarraghtuq ‘he dressed up’; aarraghaa ‘he dressed her up’ ;  Elngaatall siivanlleq tamaana aarraatesluku. ‘They brought the elder(s) there all dressed up.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:210); Aarraatkaq igaqraghllagmeng tawaten pinighrakegtepiglluku ulimalluteng. ‘everyone got all dressed up in clothing which they made as fancy as possible.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:86)	āшаӷ-
aas-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"dimensional root; > aastu-, aaskestaaghhaq"	āс-
Aasa	pos	IPA	Singikpak Pt. site east of Southwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	А̄ся̄
Aasaq	pos	IPA	former village site west of Cape Chukotskii in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	А̄сақ
aasi	pos	IPA	the number six (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	āси
aaskestaaghhaq	pos	IPA	narrow thing; something that does not extend far	"Aaskestaaghhaanghani kiyang malghugneghet piiqiit, … ‘Whenever it [the sea ice] did not extend far out they always made two [boat paths], …’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:134)"	āскыстāҳақ
aasliigh-	pos	IPA	to patch a skin boat	aasliightuq ‘he patched a boat’; aasliighaa ‘he patched it’ /	āсльӣӷ-
aasliq	pos	IPA	soup of greens and seal blood	No information given.	āсльиқ
Aasliq	pos	IPA	former village on east shore of Provideniia Bay; Plover Bay in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	А̄сльиқ
aasliquutaq	pos	IPA	grease stain in the entrance opening of a winter house	Chukotkan (R)	āсльиқӯтақ
aastu-	pos	IPA	to be wide; to extend far	"aastuuq ‘it is wide, extends far; Aastughllagyalghii, kilgaaquteghllagaqelghiit, kiyang whanikumi. ‘It was extended farther, as far as long distance runners were concerned, then than now.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:20); Aamta tuvalgunghani tawaten ataasiinaat kenilghet seggaqiit, qayughllak ilangakun tuvaq aastaaqelghii. ‘And, whenever it had shore ice like that they made but one boat path, because the shore ice extended a long way out.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:134)"	āсту-
aataararay	pos	IPA	yuck!	particle; expression of disgust or fright	āтāрараӥ
aatak	pos	IPA	do it anyway; give it a try; let's	"particle; used to boost morale; Seghleghunaqukut, yulgutmun kaatngwaaghluta tusaqunneghitem seghletun pinaqukut, aatak qitevunnaqigu! ‘Things are going poorly for us, and now that we have come across a fellow human, because we can’t understand each other we have a problem; give it a try, speak to him in the other language!’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:124); Aatak naghuyaqellaankuk meteghlluglliqellaankuk piiqagka. ‘(I’ll) give at a try,  I am trying to talk to the seagull and the raven.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 109)"	āтак
aatakqun	pos	IPA	do it anyway; give it a try; let's	"particle, used to boost morale; = aataqun"	āтакқун
aataqun	pos	IPA	do it anyway; give it a try; let's	particle; used to boost morale;  = aatakqun	āтақун
aatati	pos	IPA	the number ‘one’ (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"cf. ataasiq; the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	āтати
aatawleginaq	pos	IPA	for nothing; after all; because	"particle; aatawleginaq mughusimaaq, sakengaghsimangituq ‘he went hunting for nothing, he didn’t get anything’; unangataghalluku tagilghaaten aatawleginaq  neghsaghhnaanghituten, ayveghaghnaanghituten ‘come early in the morning, otherwise you won’t get seals or walrus’"	āтаӱлыгинақ
aate-	pos	IPA	to put on (clothes); to dress	aatuq ‘it put something on’; aataa ‘he put it on’ / aalluku ‘after putting it on’; aalleqaa ‘he will put it on’; aannaqaa ‘he is going to put it on’; aatkaagaa or aaskaagaa ‘he has put it on’; aasuwaaghaa ‘he feels like wearing it’; 	āты-
aateghngalghii	pos	IPA	loaded; put on	Chukotkan (R); questioned	āтыӷңалӷӣ
aatghute-	pos	IPA	to go out hunting on foot on the ice	sikuk kaanneghegkeni yuget aatghutaqelghiit ‘men go out hunting (on foot) once the ocean ice arrives’	āтҳуты-
aatkaq	pos	IPA	article of clothing; garment	No information given.	āткақ
aatneq	pos	IPA	slope near the beach; small portion of land extending out into the water	No information given.	āтньық
aatqaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to suddenly and quickly go out (as from room)	No information given.	āтқаҳта́ӷ-
aatqaghte-	pos	IPA	to slip or jerk when working with something by hand; to run off the road; to deviate from the desired path	aatqaghtuq ‘he or it jerked’; aatqaghtaa ‘he jerked it’/ tumeneng aatqaghtuq ‘he ran off the road’; terelleghmeng piineqegkani aatqaghtaa ‘he painted off the marked line’	āтқаҳты-
aatwarae	pos	IPA	hot water	#NAME?	āтӱараы
aavgaghte-	pos	IPA	to split open suddenly; to get injured severely on the surface of one’s body	No information given.	āвгаҳты-
aavgugh-	pos	IPA	to cut up thoroughly	No information given.	āвгуӷ-
aavneq	pos	IPA	half; half dollar	No information given.	āвнық
aavnguq	pos	IPA	burl	No information given.	āвңуқ
aavngutae	pos	IPA	sealskin pants	"used in the dual, aavngutek for one pair of pants"	āвңутаы
aaw-	pos	IPA	to bleed; to menstruate	see also aakw ‘blood’	āӱ-
aawaallu	pos	IPA	so soon!; already	particle; = aawallu	āӱāлью
aawallu	pos	IPA	so soon!; already	particle; = aawaallu	āӱалью
aawhkagh-	pos	IPA	for spring to come	aawhkaghtuq or aawhkaghaa ‘spring has come’ / cf. awa(ni)	āӱькаӷ-
aawhkaghhaaneng	pos	IPA	for ages (in the past); for quite a while now	particle	āӱькаҳāның
aawhkaghniimna	pos	IPA	previous place; former one	Chukotkan (R)	āӱхкаӷнӣмна
aawhkaghniq*	pos	IPA	hing of a while ago	#NAME?	āӱькаӷниқ
aawhkaghtaq	pos	IPA	thing of a while ago	= aawhkaghniq*	āӱькаҳтақ
aawhkan	pos	IPA	a while ago (during the same season); a week ago; a month ago	particle	āӱькан
aawhkaqun	pos	IPA	in the springtime	particle	āӱькақун
aawhkayaghaq	pos	IPA	some time ago; a while back	particle	āӱькаяӷақ
aawhtaq	pos	IPA	jade	No information given.	āӱхтақ
aawhtu-	pos	IPA	to be bloody	aawhtuuq ‘it is bloody’ / aawhtuqaq ‘a bloody thing’	āӱьту-
aawhtuqe-	pos	IPA	to bleed	aawhtuquq ‘it is bleeding’ /	āӱьтуқы-
aawiite-	pos	IPA	to lose blood	No information given.	āӱӣты-
aawite-	pos	IPA	to be bloodless	aawituq ‘it is bloodless ‘; cf. aangwunani ‘being without blood’ (irregular variant of aawinaan or aawunaan)	āӱиты-
aawyaq	pos	IPA	blood clot	No information given.	āӱяқ
aaygu	pos	IPA	arrow	No information given.	āӥгу
aayguk	pos	IPA	"pair of stars seen at dawn, Altair and Tarared in the constellation of the Eagle"	No information given.	āӥгук
aayiiq tanem	pos	IPA	preliminary incantation; call to a certain spirit	"Chukotkan (R); literally, ‘aayiiq, once again’ (aayiiq is a name of a certain spirit, a tughneghaq)"	āӥӣқ таным
aaykagh-	pos	IPA	to gamble	aaykaghtuq ‘he is gambling’; y preceding k questioned	āӥкаӷ-
aaykaq	pos	IPA	poker or similar card game; gambling	y preceding k is unusual	āӥкақ
afkuyaq	pos	IPA	cause of something (especially a problem)	"ullghitagma afkuyaa naalkaghtaqa ‘I found the cause of the problem with my wheeled/tracked vehicle’; Naghullgaqluki, pakin'gumakanga nagun iqelqwakun itegaakun, taawa taana tuqusiqaa, pakinellgha qazigyaghaam. Aatgha Anaqsi, Sikneghnii. Afkuyaghhaan. ‘While he was harpooning them, it scratched him somewhere on his little toe, and that’s what killed him, the scratch of a seal. … That was all it took.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:22)"	афкуяқ
aflaaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to interrupt	No information given.	афлья̄ҳты-
aflaaq	pos	IPA	thing between two others; middle one	No information given.	афлья̄қ
aflenga-	pos	IPA	to be thrifty; to take good care of one’s things	"aflengaaq ‘he is thrifty’, ‘he takes care of his things’ /"	афльыңа-
aflengake-	pos	IPA	to take care of (valued possession or person); to keep	aflengakaa ‘he is taking care of it’ / Qikmiqa ataasiq tuunluku maalghuk aflengakagka.’ I gave away one of my dogs and kept two.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 8)	афльыңакы-
aflenganeq	pos	IPA	thrifty person; one who takes good care of what he has	aflenganghuuq ‘he’s a person who takes good care of what he has’	афльыңанық
aflu	pos	IPA	the span from one thing to another (as from one hour to the next); thing between two others (as a child born between two others)	Estamat aflut piyugutkanka. ‘I walked for four hours.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 132)	афлью
aflute-	pos	IPA	to feel sorry for; to sympathize with	Chukotkan (R)	афльюты-
afsengaghpak	pos	IPA	muskrat (Ondata zibethicus); beaver (Castor canadensis)	Chukotkan	афсыңаҳпак
afsengaghqe-	pos	IPA	for there to be the squeaking sound of a mouse	"afsengaghquq ‘there’s a squeaking, mouse sound’"	афсыңаҳқы-
afsengaq*	pos	IPA	vole (Microtus sp. ); locally mouse; also slang for lump of dried nasal mucus	No information given.	афсыңақ
afta-	pos	IPA	to cut up game; to butcher game; to have surgery (additional Chukotkan meaning)	aftaaq ‘he butchered an animal’; aftaa ‘he butchered it’ /	афта-
afte-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > afta-, aafte-; cf. avek"	афты-
aga	pos	IPA	away; gone; there	"particle; this is the interjectional form of the demo. adverb aga(ni) from demo. pronoun aagna(q.v.); Amaaghllak aga estunaquq. ‘There he goes, the wolf is about to slide.’  (AYUM. UNGIP. I:7)"	ага
agaavik	pos	IPA	double hook used to fasten caught walrus to side of boat	Chukotkan (R)	агāвик
agagh-	pos	IPA	hanging	"postural root; agaghtuq ‘it got hung, snagged’; agaghtaa ‘he hung it up’; agaghngaaq ‘it is hanging’; agaghfik ‘place to hang things’"	агаӷ-
agaghfikutaq	pos	IPA	clothes hanger; clothespin; peg for hanging things; hook for hanging things	No information given.	агаҳфикутақ
agaghtiiraagh-	pos	IPA	to hang; to be hanging	Chukotkan (R)	агаҳтӣрāӷ-
agaghtusiq	pos	IPA	clothes hanger; clothespin; peg for hanging things; hook for hanging things	No information given.	агаҳтусиқ
agaghugllaka	pos	IPA	"oh, what a pity!"	particle	агаӷухльяка
agalghu-	pos	IPA	to stagger	agalghuuq ‘he staggered’ / agalghwaaghtuq ‘he keeps staggering as he walks’	агалӷу-
agalqutaq	pos	IPA	peg for hanging things; hook for hanging things	No information given.	агальқутақ
agam	pos	IPA	"okay, that’s enough"	Chukotkan (R); particle	агам
agangsitagh-	pos	IPA	to stay away	"agangsitaghtuq ‘he, or it, it staying away’ / kayut saamkut agangsitaghtat nalleq? ‘why are the fish down there staying away?’"	агаңситаӷ-
agaqraq	pos	IPA	peg for hanging things; hook for hanging things	No information given.	агақшақ
agaten	pos	IPA	must be the case; unenthusiastic	"particle (perhaps two different particles);  agaten aghuliighaqluni igleghtaquq ‘he must be stopping once in a while as he travels’; qeghalguteyeng ataasiq agaten ayuqaqaa ‘they aren’t very enthusiastic about one of their fellow workers’; Ataasit agaten amaallgaat esghaqaghaqanka, pamakaghtat. ‘I’d see an occasional wolfskin [ruff] which must have come from Siberia.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:114)"	агатын
agatu	pos	IPA	type of kelp (Agarum cribrosum)	No information given.	агату
agenriqe-	pos	IPA	to think carefully about something	agenriquq ‘he thought carefully’; agenriqaqulluku pegnem ayveq qaakaghput ‘after we thought carefully about it we finally pulled the walrus out’	агынриқы-
agepsugh- 	pos	IPA	to be smoky	agepsughtuq ‘it is smoky’ / agepsughtaa ‘it is getting smoky’	агыпсюӷ-
agepsuq	pos	IPA	smoke; steam	agepsughtuuq ‘there's a lot of smoke’; agepsughtaaghtuq ‘it has smoke coming out of it’	агыпсюқ
agesngughte-	pos	IPA	to kill instantly (especally by hitting on bridge of nose); to knock out (?)	agesngughtaa ‘he killed it instantly’/ ayveq agesngughlluku tuqutaa ‘he killed the walrus instantly (by hitting it on the bridge of the nose)’	агысңьуҳты-
agesta	pos	IPA	sh-sh; hush!	Chukotkan (R); particle	агыста
agghi	pos	IPA	conference	No information given.	агӷи
agghi-	pos	IPA	to confer; to decide	"agghiiq ‘he decided’/ agghiit ‘they are conferring, deciding on something’; agghitkaa ‘he decided concerning it, figured it out’; agghiiq igleghhnaluni ‘he decided to go’"	агӷи-
agghista	pos	IPA	commander	No information given.	агӷиста
agghiyugniqe-	pos	IPA	to be spoiled; to be obstinate	cf. agghi; mekelghiighhaq agghiyugniquq ghhuuteghngaatni wata an’gighnaluni ‘the little boy tried to have his way and stay outdoors even though it was cold’	агӷиюгниқы-
agha	pos	IPA	amulet; medicine; aspirin	No information given.	аӷа
aghaligh-	pos	IPA	to treat with medicine; to medicate; to put on an amulet	aghalightuq ‘he took medicine or put on an amulet’; aghalighaa ‘he gave her medicine or put an amulet on her’/	аӷалиӷ-
aghallegtaq	pos	IPA	doctor	No information given.	аӷальыхтақ
aghanghuuraq	pos	IPA	amulet attached on to belt or clothing;  medicinal plant sewn on to animal skin and attached to one’s belt	Chukotkan (R)	аӷанӷӯрақ
aghavaghllak	pos	IPA	clear weather	No information given.	аӷаваҳльяк
aghavraq	pos	IPA	Alaska poppy (Papaver alaskanum)	No information given.	аӷаврақ
aghelqute-	pos	IPA	to move a little (of something heavy and/or tight); to budge	"aghelqutuq ‘it moved a little, it budged’; aghelqutaa ‘he moved it a little, he budged it’/"	аӷыльқуты-
aghenqigneq	pos	IPA	right-hand side	aghenqigneghmun ‘to the right’	аӷынқигнық
aghevestaaghaq*	pos	IPA	soft thing; person who is weak-willed and easily influenced	qenu meghmelnguq aghevestaaghhaaguq ‘the new ice in the ocean is soft’	аӷывыстāҳақ
aghevestaaq	pos	IPA	soft thing; person who is weak-willed and easily influenced	anigu qaga aghevestaapiguuq ifkanghhaaluni ‘the newly fallen snow out there is very soft’; aghevestaaq ugharra piyullginnapigtuq ‘the soft marsh is hard to walk on’	аӷывыстāқ
aghhmagte-	pos	IPA	to take all; to use all	aghhmagtaa ‘he took or used all of it’ /	аҳмьахты-
aghhmeghneq	pos	IPA	firmness; sturdiness	aghhmeghneqegtaq ‘a sturdy skin or piece of clothing’	аҳмьыӷнық
aghhunneghagu	pos	IPA	every day	"particle (actually inflected form); literally, ‘whenever day comes upon it’;  = eghhunneghagu"	аҳуньыӷагу
aghhutanga tamaghhaan	pos	IPA	every day	"literally, ‘its becoming day, every one’; Aghhutanga tamaghhaan takwaaqiit. ‘Every day they would check it.’ (PIYAA. 14)"	аҳутаңа тамахāн
aghhutkun	pos	IPA	at dawn	adverbial particle; aghhutkun esla naavuq ‘the weather got bad at dawn’	аҳуткун
aghi-	pos	IPA	to be wet	aghiiq or aghii ‘it got wet’ / cf. aghilluk	аӷи-
aghiknaq	pos	IPA	“prickly” sculpin	exact species undetermined	аӷикньақ
aghilluk	pos	IPA	skin mitten; glove	Chukotkan; cf. aghi-	аӷильюк
aghinaq	pos	IPA	moisture outdoors; wet weather	No information given.	аӷинақ
aghinghwaaq	pos	IPA	small bag of sealskin holding certain articles used to try to ensure good whale hunting	No information given.	аӷинӷӱāқ
aghinqagh-	pos	IPA	to wet	Chukotkan (V&E)	аӷинқаӷ-
aghipa	pos	IPA	wetness; moisture	No information given.	аӷипа
aghipate-	pos	IPA	to be wet; to be raw	"aghipatuq ‘it is wet’, ‘it is raw’ /"	аӷипаты-
aghipsaate-	pos	IPA	to be partly wet; to be partially raw	aghipsaalnguq ‘partially wet or raw thing’	аӷипся̄ты-
aghisigh-	pos	IPA	to soak	aghisightuq ‘it is being soaked or he is letting himself get wet’; aghisighaa ‘he is soaking it’ /	аӷисиӷ-
aghitqe-	pos	IPA	to get very wet	aghitquq ‘he or it got very wet’; aghitqaa ‘he got it very wet’ /	аӷитқы-
aghiva-	pos	IPA	to quarrel (of women); to bawl out (by women)	"aghivaaq ‘she is quarreling with someone, bawling out someone’; aghivaa ‘she is quarreling with her’ / aghivatuk ‘they (two women) are quarreling’"	аӷива-
aghliigh-	pos	IPA	overwhelmed	emotional root; aghliighyugtuq ‘he feels overwhelmed by the tasks facing him’; aghliighyukaa ‘he feels overwhelmed by it’; aghliighnaghtuq ‘it is overwhelming’	аӷлӣӷ-
aghmig-	pos	IPA	to wash one's face	aghmigtuq ‘he washed his (own) face’; aghmigaa ‘he washed his (another's) face’ /	аӷмиг-
aghmigusiq	pos	IPA	washcloth; face soap; washbasin	"used in the dual, aghmigusik, for one washbasin"	аӷмигусиқ
aghnaaghte-	pos	IPA	to have one's first menses	No information given.	аӷнāҳты-
aghnaaneq	pos	IPA	"female bird, fish, or seal or other animal; state of being female"	No information given.	аӷнāнық
aghnaasiq	pos	IPA	effeminate man; homosexual male	"Kiyaghneghem Ataneghpagullghani nekaghqiitut: … allaniighet, aghnaasit, … ‘In God’s Kingdom there is no room for: … adulterers, the effeminate , …’ (1 Corinthians 6.9)"	аӷнāсиқ
aghnagan	pos	IPA	hurry up	"particle; aghnagan uyuq emta ‘hurry up you, knowing how you are’"	аӷнаган
aghnagh-	pos	IPA	to wear a dress	aghnaghluni ‘wearing a dress’; direct verbalization of aghnaq ‘woman’	аӷнаӷ-
Aghnaghaak	pos	IPA	Aghnak River on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Аӷнаӷāк
aghnaghaghhaq*	pos	IPA	little girl	No information given.	аӷнаӷаҳақ
Aghnaghaghyaget	pos	IPA	Pleides constellation	"literally, ‘group of girls’"	Аӷнаӷаӷьягыт
aghnaghaq*	pos	IPA	girl	No information given.	аӷнаӷақ
aghnaghniite-	pos	IPA	to be ugly (a girl)	No information given.	аӷнаӷниты-
aghnaghpallaghte-	pos	IPA	to become an older woman	No information given.	аӷнаҳпальяҳты-
aghnaghpallaghtekaq	pos	IPA	older woman	No information given.	аӷнаҳпальяҳтыкақ
aghnaghqaq	pos	IPA	wife-to-be; female to be included in a group; dress material	No information given.	аӷнаҳқақ
aghnaghuq	pos	IPA	edible seashore life resembling a mouse in appearance (Boltenia ovifera); “sea onion”	cf. aghnaq	аӷнаӷуқ
aghnalgun	pos	IPA	mother's sister's child; parallel cousin on mother's side	No information given.	аӷналгун
aghnalqwaaq	pos	IPA	old woman	No information given.	аӷнальқӱāқ
aghnalqwaavregaq	pos	IPA	old senile woman	Chukotkan (V&E)	аӷнальқӱāврыгақ
aghnangllagh-	pos	IPA	to make a dress; to ask to marry (of an older man asking a woman on behalf of a younger man)	Aghnaghaat igaghvigmi aghnangllaatut. ‘The girls made dresses in school.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 11); Yuuk aghnangllaghiiq ighneghminun. ‘The man asked that a certain girl should be the wife for his son.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 11)	аӷнаңльяӷ-
aghnapari	pos	IPA	older girl; young woman	Chukotkan (R)	аӷнапари
aghnapesqighte-	pos	IPA	to sit (in woman’s traditional style)	sitting by bending one leg resting it on the floor while the other leg is also bent but upright with the foot flat on the floor; aghnapesqighlluteng aghnat avegtughaqut neghuunneghmeggmi ‘sitting woman-style the women are cutting food at meal time’	аӷнапысқиҳты-
aghnaq	pos	IPA	woman; female human; dress (when used in dual)	No information given.	аӷнақ
aghnaqe-	pos	IPA	to be proud in a way appropriate for a woman	aghnaquq ‘she is proud’/	аӷнақы-
aghnaqemsighte-	pos	IPA	to sit (in woman’s traditional style)	sitting by bending one leg resting it on the floor while the other leg is also bent but upright with the foot flat on the floor	аӷнақымсиҳты-
aghnasalek	pos	IPA	female walrus; cow walrus	No information given.	аӷнасялык
aghnasiq	pos	IPA	“sea cabbage”	Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined	аӷнасиқ
aghneghet	pos	IPA	dawn; dusk; twilight	Chukotkan (R)	аӷныӷыт
aghneghiinaghqun	pos	IPA	daily	particle	аӷныӷӣнаҳқун
aghneghmi	pos	IPA	today; during the daytime	particle	аӷныӷми
aghneghniimna	pos	IPA	the one from earlier today	No information given.	аӷныӷнӣмна
aghneghtaq	pos	IPA	the one from earlier today	nagu yuuk aghneghtaq? ‘where is the man from earlier today’	аӷныҳтақ
aghneghte-	pos	IPA	to spend the day	"Sivuqaaneng piiwaaluni Sivungami aghneghsimalghii ‘when he was going back home to Gambell from Northeast Cape, he spent the day at Savoonga’"	аӷныҳты-
aghneghtughte-	pos	IPA	for the days to get longer	No information given.	аӷныҳтуҳты-
aghneghtuumaan	pos	IPA	during the day as well	essentially a particle	аӷныҳтӯмāн
aghneq	pos	IPA	day; today (as a particle)	"aghneqaghaq ‘earlier today’; Sivuliq aghneq ‘Sunday’; Allgha aghneq ‘Monday’; Pingayaa aghneq ‘Tuesday’; Estamaa aghneq ‘Wednesday’; Tallimaa aghneq ‘Thursday’; Aghvillgha aghneq ‘Friday’; Maaghraghvinlek aghneq ‘Saturday’; Aghnaghaq una qepghaghpenani quunpeng naghaaghllak tamaghhaan aghneq. Aghneq iingunaan qepghanemni, qenwat meghnughaqunga. ‘This girl plays without working every day. When I work all day, I am tired.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 68)"	аӷнық
Aghneq	pos	IPA	site in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Аӷнық
aghnequn	pos	IPA	this afternoon; later today	particle	аӷнықун
aghneqwaaqun	pos	IPA	a little later today	particle	аӷнықӱāқун
aghni-	pos	IPA	"to spend one or more days; to stay an extra day while travelling (usually, in order to rest)"	qikmini meghnaalisqelluki aghniiq ‘he stayed an extra day to let his dogs rest’	аӷни-
aghpenghhayaaghek 	pos	IPA	billowy bloomers; woman's underpants	No information given.	аҳпынҳая̄ӷык
aghpu-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > aghpugte-, aghpuuk, aghpumla, aghpuneq, aghpunghhaak"	аҳпу-
aghpugpaghlleq	pos	IPA	small blister	< aghpu-?-ghpak-lleq	аҳпухпаҳльық
aghpugte-	pos	IPA	to rise (of dough  or the like); to swell	"Chukotkan (R, V&E) "	аҳпухты-
aghpumla	pos	IPA	"deep, soft, powdery snow"	No information given.	аҳпумля
aghpumla-	pos	IPA	to go through deep snow	aghpumlaaq ‘he went through deep snow’	аҳпумля-
aghpuneq	pos	IPA	gas in stomach or intestines	aghpuniqunga ‘I am now troubled by gas in my stomach or intestines’ 	аҳпунық
aghpuneqrak	pos	IPA	bubble	eslallugmi mesagmi allgeghumaaq uglalghii aghpuneqrak ‘a lot of bubbles  formed in the puddle during the rain’	аҳпунықшак
aghpunghhaak	pos	IPA	billowy bloomers; woman's underpants	No information given.	аҳпунҳāк
Aghpuuget	pos	IPA	a particular clan	singular is Aghpuuk	Аҳпӯгыт
aghpuugsaasiq	pos	IPA	baking powder; leavening agent	No information given.	аҳпӯхся̄сиқ
aghpuuk	pos	IPA	foam	No information given.	аҳпӯк
aghpuulleq	pos	IPA	blister	Chukotkan (R)	аҳпӯльық
aghqaraataq	pos	IPA	noose	Chukotkan (R)	аҳқарāтақ
aghqe-1	pos	IPA	to make an offering of food for the deceased	cf. eghqwaagh-	аҳқы-1
aghqe-2 	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > aghqelli-, aghqelngestaq, aghqestaaq, aghqitaghaq"	аҳқы-2
aghqefik	pos	IPA	place for making food offerings to the deceased (traditionally); altar	No information given.	аҳқыфик
aghqelengestaq1	pos	IPA	primer for bullet	No information given.	аҳқылыңыстақ1
aghqelengestaq2	pos	IPA	shallow water (or anything else)	No information given.	аҳқылыңыстақ2
aghqella	pos	IPA	seine	No information given.	аҳқылья
aghqella-	pos	IPA	to fish with seine	Kiiwegni aghqellaakut. ‘We seined at the river.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 15)	аҳқылья-
aghqelli-	pos	IPA	to lower; to make lower; to become shallow	"aghqelliiq ‘it is becoming lower, getting shallow’; aghqellii ‘he is lowering it, making it lower’ / aghqellii aghvighyaghaq ‘he made the crossing ramp lower’; naayvaq aghqelliighaghtuq ‘the lake is becoming shallow’"	аҳқыльи-
aghqeme-	pos	IPA	to crumble; to shatter; to become envious	aghqemuq ‘it shattered’ / aghqemtaa ‘he shattered it’; qayuusiq ifkaghlluku aghqemsimaa ‘by dropping the cup he made it shatter’;  aghqemuq anengani ullgitangyan‘ he became envious when his older brother got a snowmachine’	аҳқымы-
aghqengwaagh-	pos	IPA	to make a sacrifice	Chukotkan (R)	аҳқыңӱāӷ-
aghqestaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	shoal; low thing	No information given.	аҳқыстāҳақ
aghqestaalleq	pos	IPA	shoal; low thing	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	аҳқыстāльық
aghqetghagh-	pos	IPA	to crust over (of snow); to travel on crusted snow; to freeze over (of surface of snow)	Ighivgaqun aghqetghaqagu igleghllequnga. ‘I’ll leave when the snow crusts over tonight.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 15)	аҳқытҳаӷ-
aghqetghaq	pos	IPA	refrozen ground in spring; frozen crust on snow	caused by low termperatures at night after a warm day	аҳқытҳақ
aghqiikw	pos	IPA	squeak or crunch of snow or pebbles under the feet	aghqiikw qiinghaghsaqegka qikmiiftuq ‘I looked out to check on the crunching noise and it turned out to be a dog’	аҳқӣӱк
aghqiiwhtagh-	pos	IPA	to make a crunching sound	aghqiiwhtaghtuq ‘he made a crunching sound’	аҳқӣӱхтаӷ-
Aghqitaghangha	pos	IPA	southern part of Troutman Lake which is next to Gambell	literally ‘the shallow area’; see Map 7 in Appendices	Аҳқитаӷанӷа
aghqitaghaq	pos	IPA	shallow water	No information given.	аҳқитаӷақ
aghqulluk	pos	IPA	northern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialis)	No information given.	аҳқульюк
aghqunqaq	pos	IPA	crest along mountainside; small depression; hole; curve	No information given.	аҳқунқақ
aghqutite-	pos	IPA	to make sacrifices	Chukotkan (R)	аҳқутиты-
aghquugte-	pos	IPA	to be pale from illness	cf. aghsugh-	аҳқӯхты-
aghquutke-	pos	IPA	to cause disaster or hardship	ulevelleghmeng aghquutkaqii yuget aangelghiimeng ikfiqmeng ‘the flood is causing the people hardship’ (?)	аҳқуткы-
aghquvlug-	pos	IPA	to make a depressionor dent; to hollow out	No information given.	аҳқувлуг-
aghquvluk	pos	IPA	depression; hollow; dent	qulmesiin aghquvlukegtepigtuq ‘the cooking pot has a big dent’	аҳқувлук
aghsaakun	pos	IPA	cleanly	particle	аҳся̄кун
aghsaan	pos	IPA	excessively; overly; too much; not very much	particle; ugket taghyulipalghiim aghsaan taghyughnitkayuguut ‘when you put too much salt in cooked meat it tastes overly salty’; aghsaan tuuneghllagpenanga ‘don't give me too much’; aghsaan mekestaapiwaa ‘how small it is!’; movie aghsaan ayuqeftuq ‘the movie wasn’t very good’	аҳся̄н
aghsagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root > aghsaghte-, aghsaghmete-, aghsaan"	аҳсяӷ-
aghsaghmete-	pos	IPA	to be good weather; to favor; to pay particular attention (good or bad) toward (him)	aghsaghmetuq ‘it (the weather is good)’; aghsaghmetaa ‘he favors him’ / 	аҳсяӷмыты-
aghsaghtaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to give up or quit from malice or out of vexation	Chukotkan (R); questioned	аҳсяҳтаӷӱāӷ-
aghsaghte-	pos	IPA	to overdo; to behave in an excessive way; to annoy	"yugem aghsaghtawaaghyaqminigu ilani amyughaaghmeng, elngaatall qinuyugtekaa ‘when the man teased his friend too much that friend was greatly annoyed’"	аҳсяҳты-
aghsi	pos	IPA	thong holding shank (giimaq) to harpoon shaft	#NAME?	аҳси
aghsug-	pos	IPA	to put (a baby) down to sleep	aghsugaa ‘he put it (baby) down to sleep’ / aghsugiiq he put a baby down to sleep’; Taghnughhaqa aghsugaqa qavaghyan. ‘I lay down my child [in bed] when she went to sleep.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 16)	аҳсюг-
aghsugh-	pos	IPA	to be or become pale; to be or become bleached	aghsughtuq ‘he or it became pale’ / aghsughtaa ‘he bleached it’; cf aghquugte-	аҳсюӷ-
Aghsughaleq	pos	IPA	site on the coast east of Gambell at Tiflighak Bay	see Map 7 in Appendices	Аҳсюӷалық
aghsughpaglleq	pos	IPA	small scratch	No information given.	аҳсюҳпахльық
aghsughtaq	pos	IPA	bleached dried sealgut for making rain or wind parka; sealgut rain or wind parka	No information given.	аҳсюҳтақ
aghsugutaq 	pos	IPA	crib for baby to sleep in	No information given.	аҳсюгутақ
aghtaghagh-	pos	IPA	to become light	aghtaghaghtuq ‘it is becoming light’ / 	аҳтаӷаӷ-
aghte-	pos	IPA	to dawn; for day to break	"aghtuq ‘it is dawn, it has become day’ / aghhutanga maliglluku aliighaa ‘it cleared up as it became day’; aghhutaa ‘day came upon him’; = eghte-"	аҳты-
aghteq-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root > aghteqeregaaq, aghteqeregagh-, aghtequq"	аҳтық-
aghteqeregaaq	pos	IPA	puffball (Bovista sp.)	No information given.	аҳтықырыгāқ
aghteqeregagh-	pos	IPA	to snack on roots or greens with blubber and raw meat	No information given.	аҳтықырыгаӷ-
aghtequq	pos	IPA	dish of roots or greens with blubber and raw meat	"Nunivagmeng aghtequlighluku neghtunga. ‘I ate, having rosewort as a side dish.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 17)"	аҳтықуқ
aghtequsaq	pos	IPA	blubber eaten with roots or greens	No information given.	аҳтықусяқ
aghtugh-	pos	IPA	"to be unable to manage, bear, withstand or accomplish"	aghtughaa ‘he can't bear it or can't do it’ / aghtiigatuq ‘he isn't stopped by difficulties’; Neqesghanka esghaneghmeng aghtughanka pightum. ‘Because of the blowing snow I couldn’t see my fox baits.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 130)	аҳтуӷ-
aghtughyaghqanghilleq	pos	IPA	power	used in Bible translation	аҳтуӷьяҳқанӷильық
aghtuneq	pos	IPA	the lowest level of the atmosphere near the earth	No information given.	аҳтунық
aghu-	pos	IPA	to rot; to (over)ripen; to decompose	aghuuq or aghwaa ‘it rotted’ / cf. aghusi	аӷу-
aghukaq 	pos	IPA	rotten thing; (over)ripe thing	No information given.	аӷукақ
aghula	pos	IPA	Eskimo-style dance	No information given.	аӷуля
aghula-	pos	IPA	to dance Eskimo-style; to shake (as to wake up a person); to move back and forth (as of something hanging)	"aghulaaq ‘he is dancing’, ‘it is moving back and forth’ / aghulataa ‘he shook her/it’"	аӷуля-
aghulaataq	pos	IPA	stick on which one winds fishing line lengthwise over the notched ends	"plural, aghulaatat, used for one such device"	аӷулāтақ
aghulaatat 	pos	IPA	stick for winding fishing line	No information given.	аӷуля̄тат
aghulaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to go to gather edible greens	aghulaghqughtuq ‘she went to gather greens’ /	аӷуляҳқуӷ-
aghulaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	"to fly, flutter, or sway"	Chukotkan (R)	аӷуляӷӱāӷ-
aghulaqe-	pos	IPA	to leave	aghulaquq ‘he left’ / aghulaqutaa ‘he took it with him when he went’	аӷуляқы-
aghulasiq	pos	IPA	dance movement that goes with a particular song	No information given.	аӷулясиқ
aghulate-	pos	IPA	to shake	aghulatuq ‘it shook’; aghulataa ‘he shook it’ / iiggakun aghulataa ‘he shook hands with her’; anuqem veglluk agaghngalghii aghulataa ‘the wind is shaking the towel hanging on the line’	аӷуляты-
aghuliigh-	pos	IPA	to stop moving	"aghuliightuq ‘he or it stopped’ / aghuliightaa ‘he stopped it, made it stop’"	аӷулӣӷ-
aghuqe-	pos	IPA	to distribute shares of a catch; to distribute gifts	aghuqaa ‘he gave a share to her ‘/ aghuqiiq ‘he is distributing things to people’	аӷуқы-
aghusi 	pos	IPA	waterproof parka made from large intestine of walrus; gutskin raincoat	"may be used in dual, aghusik, or plural, aghusit, for a single parka; cf. aghu-"	аӷуси
aghusingwaaq1	pos	IPA	waterproof skin-boot	No information given.	аӷусиңӱāқ1
aghusingwaaq2	pos	IPA	seashell	No information given.	аӷусиңӱāқ2
aghusiq	pos	IPA	vessel for aging food	No information given.	аӷусиқ
aghvaghlluk	pos	IPA	clear sky all around	No information given.	аӷваҳльюк
aghvak	pos	IPA	edge of hand away from thumb	plural used for one person's hands' edges: aghvagenka ‘the edges of my hands’	аӷвак
aghvaq	pos	IPA	bright sky seen in the distance along the horizon and indicating good weather to come	aghvaq taakwa mayughtuq ‘the band of clear sky is spreading upward from the bottom’	аӷвақ
aghveghaq1	pos	IPA	bowhead whale calf (Balaena mysticetus)	No information given.	аӷвыӷақ1
aghveghaq2	pos	IPA	ridge of a roof	cf.  aghveq	аӷвыӷақ2
aghveghaqetaq	pos	IPA	"pole in center of outer room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	аӷвыӷақытақ
aghveghllugaq	pos	IPA	grey whale calf (Eschrichtius robustus)	No information given.	аӷвыҳльюгақ
aghveghpak	pos	IPA	blue mussel	No information given.	аӷвыҳпак
aghveghqutaq	pos	IPA	blade of whaling harpoon	No information given.	аӷвыҳқутақ
aghveghwaaq	pos	IPA	piece cut from the flukes of a whale and used by little boys while playing at whaling; figurine of a whale or other thing shaped like a whale	No information given.	аӷвыӷӱāқ
aghvenge-	pos	IPA	to catch whale	angyat aghvengut ‘the boat caught a whale’	аӷвыңы-
aghvengyuqaq	pos	IPA	successful proficient skilled whale-hunter	No information given.	аӷвыңьюқақ
aghvepik	pos	IPA	bowhead whale (Balaena mysticetus)	No information given.	аӷвыпик
aghveq	pos	IPA	whale	Iqallugestun meghmi kiyaghtaqut. Iwernga aghveghet iqallugunghitut. ‘Like fish they live in the water; however whales are not fish.’ (AANGHHAQ 64)	аӷвық
aghveqaghtaatek	pos	IPA	bolas	No information given.	аӷвықаҳтāтык
aghveqaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to hunt with bolas	No information given.	аӷвықаҳтаӷ-
aghveqe-	pos	IPA	to harpoon (a whale); to strike (a whale)	aghveqaa ‘he stuck it’ / aghveqiiq ‘he struck a whale’	аӷвықы-
aghveqe- 	pos	IPA	"to have shingles, the disease – Herpes zoster"	aghvequq ‘he has shingles’	аӷвықы-
aghveqengertaq	pos	IPA	harbor porpoise (Phocoena phocoena)	No information given.	аӷвықыңыштақ
aghveqenghaq	pos	IPA	a few whales swimming together	No information given.	аӷвықынӷақ
aghveqi-	pos	IPA	to strike a whale	aghveqiiq ‘he struck a whale’	аӷвықи-
aghveqinghaq	pos	IPA	whale stew	No information given.	аӷвықинӷақ
aghvequte-	pos	IPA	to fall forward hard; to plunge to the ground from a height	aghvequtuq ‘he fell forward’ / aghvequtestaa ‘he made him fall forward’; aghvequsalghiimi quulvaqaaneng pikegken aga taluqaghtengnginaamaghmi meghmun ‘when he plunged from a considerable height he fell right into the water’	аӷвықуты-
aghvesak	pos	IPA	large bowhead whale (Balaena mysticetus)	No information given.	аӷвысяк
aghvesiiq	pos	IPA	humpback whale (Megaptera novaeangliae)	No information given.	аӷвысӣқ
aghveyugagh1-  	pos	IPA	to be semicircular	No information given.	аӷвыюгаӷ1-
aghveyugaq	pos	IPA	half-round file; ridge of roof; base of hill	No information given.	аӷвыюгақ
aghvig-	pos	IPA	to wash clothes	aghvigaa ‘he washed it’ / aghvigiiq ‘he washed some clothes’	аӷвиг-
aghvigaq	pos	IPA	washed laundry	Aghviganka eslakun iniinka. ‘I hung my laundry outdoors.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 64)	аӷвигақ
aghvigh-	pos	IPA	to go across; to cross over; to leave St. Lawrence Is. for Chukotka	aghvightuq ‘he crossed over’; aghvighaa ‘he crossed it’ / aghviitaa ‘he took it across’; kestilghiini iigget aghviqiinaghaqluteng piiqut ‘when counting one crosses back and forth from hand to hand’; cf. maaghraghvinlek	аӷвиӷ-
aghvighqun	pos	IPA	rope that is attached to the bottom of the keel and the side of a boat for stability	No information given.	аӷвиҳқун
aghvightaq	pos	IPA	boys' game involving throwing rocks at a target	No information given.	аӷвиҳтақ
Aghvightek	pos	IPA	projection of land into lagoon from near the center of the barrier isthmus of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Аӷвиҳтык
aghvigisiq	pos	IPA	washing machine; washtub	"used in the dual, aghvigisik, for one washing machine or tub"	аӷвигисиқ
aghvigisiq	pos	IPA	water for washing clothes; detergent	No information given.	аӷвигисиқ
aghvik	pos	IPA	scraper made from walrus ivory	"also used in the dual, aghvigek, for a single scraper"	аӷвик
Aghvillgha aghneq 	pos	IPA	Friday	from Friday being the sixth day of the week	Аӷвильҳа аӷнық
aghvilqaghtaq	pos	IPA	a group of six	No information given.	аӷвильқаҳтақ
aghvinlek	pos	IPA	six	No information given.	аӷвинлык
Aghviqaghfiget	pos	IPA	the Meregta-Gambell Trail	see Map 7 in Appendices	Аӷвиқаҳфигыт
aghviqaq	pos	IPA	one who has crossed over; International Dateline	No information given.	аӷвиқақ
aghyanegh-	pos	IPA	to hurry; to get ready fast; to rush	aghyaneghtuq ‘he rushed’ / aghyaghuunnaqelghiit aghyanghutaqeftut ‘the ones going boating are rushing about’; kingunnayukangatni aghyaneghtuq ‘he rushed around in case he was late’	аӷьяныӷ-
aghyanghute-	pos	IPA	to rush around	aghyanghutuq ‘he rushed around’	аӷьяниӷуты-
aghyaniqe-	pos	IPA	to rush around	aghyaniquq ‘he rushed around’	аӷьяниқы-
aghyugh-	pos	IPA	to get old; to age	"aghyughtuq or aghyughaa ‘he or it is getting old’ / aghyuqaghllak, aghyuumaasuk, aghyuumaghlluk, or aghyughllakaq ‘a very old, perhaps rotten, thing’"	аӷьюӷ-
aghyughqaq	pos	IPA	old person; aged food; old thing	No information given.	аӷьюҳқақ
aghyughsigh-	pos	IPA	to age food as a means of storage and/or preparation	aghyughsightuq ‘he aged food’; aghyughsighaa ‘he aged it’ /	аӷьюҳсиӷ-
aghyughsighaq	pos	IPA	aged food	No information given.	аӷьюҳсиӷақ
aghyuqe-	pos	IPA	to be homesick; to be tired of (it/him)	aghyuquq ‘he is homesick’ / aghyuqutaa ‘he is tired of it or her’	аӷьюқы-
aghyuugh-	pos	IPA	to scold; to spank	"aghyuughaa ‘he scolded her, spanked her ‘/ aghyuughiiq ‘he scolded or spanked someone’"	аӷью̄ӷ-
aghyuuniigh-	pos	IPA	to scold someone	Chukotkan (R)	аӷью̄нӣӷ-
aghyuutagh-	pos	IPA	to be strict	Chukotkan (R); aghyuutalghii ‘strict person’	аӷьью̄таӷ-
agi	pos	IPA	sister-in-law (either brother’s wife or wife’s brother) of a man; brother-in-law (either sister’s husband or husband’s sister) of a woman	"that is, man's brother's wife, or man's wife's sister, or woman's sister's husband, or woman's husband's brother; "	аги
agigpughagh-	pos	IPA	to peek in; to look down from the top 	Chukotkan (R)	агихпуӷаӷ-
Agigsaghvik	pos	IPA	site in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	агихсяӷвик
agigseghwaaghvik	pos	IPA	lookout; vantage point; viewpoint	No information given.	агихсыӷӱāӷвик
agigselghaq	pos	IPA	high place for observation	nanevgaq esghapagaquq qavrelegnun agigselghaneng ‘the old man is watching the place with migrating walrus from the high place’	агихсылӷақ
agigte-	pos	IPA	to peek over; to look around from a vantage point; to go to a high point 	"agigtuq ‘he went up to look around, he peeked over’ / agigutaa ‘he took it up or met him at the high spot’"	агихты-
agipaneq	pos	IPA	hole	Chukotkan (R)	агипанық
agitagh-	pos	IPA	open-mouthed	postural root; agitaghtuq ‘he opened his mouth’; agitaghtaa ‘he opened its mouth or spread it open’; agitaghngaaq ‘he has his mouth open’; pumsukegtaatek agitaghtaak ‘he opened the scissors’	агитаӷ-
agitagha-	pos	IPA	to yawn	agitaghaaq ‘he yawned’ / agitaghaaghaataghtuq ‘he keeps yawning’	агитаӷа-
agivike-	pos	IPA	to take one’s share of the catch to one’s inlaws when one is a newlywed man	"agivikiiq ‘he (the future son-in-law) gave food to his fiance’s family’; nulightunghhaaluteng mekelghiighet neqetateng nengiteng sakimeggnun aglaatkayugit neghighluku salin nengughtellghilluteng aatghi agivikusat ‘after having recently gotten married, young men used to bring over the food they’d caught, their shares, to their inlaws and establishing domestic relationships that way they were called agiviks.’"	агивикы-
aglagh-	pos	IPA	to go home; to go from one place to another	"aglaghtuq ‘he went over’, ‘he went home’ / aglaataa ‘he took it over or home’; aglamsaagtuq ‘he finally went over or home’"	агляӷ-
aglaquq	pos	IPA	socket for a mast of ship	No information given.	агляқуқ
agleghnagh-	pos	IPA	to be sacred	No information given.	аглыӷнаӷ-
Agleghnalghii Taghneghaq	pos	IPA	Holy Ghost	"also used in the dual, Agleghnalghiik Taghneghak"	Аглыӷналӷӣ Таӷныӷақ
agleghnaq	pos	IPA	revered thing; sacred thing	No information given.	аглыӷнақ
agleghu	pos	IPA	mourning ceremony	Chukotkan (R); direct nominalization of verb agleghu-	аглыӷу
agleghu-	pos	IPA	to follow traditional abstinence practices	No information given.	аглыӷу-
aglekesegaq	pos	IPA	Steller's eider  (Polysticta stelleri)	No information given.	аглыкысыгақ
agleq	pos	IPA	person who is following traditional abstinence practices	No information given.	аглық
aglug-	pos	IPA	to rummage	aglugtuq ‘he rummaged through something’; aglugaa ‘he rummaged through it’ / 	аглюг-
Aglughaaq	pos	IPA	site on northern shore of Koozata Lagoon near Silook camp	see Map 5 in Appendices	Аглюӷāқ
aglughtaq	pos	IPA	mast step of a boat; clamp holding sail to mast	No information given.	аглюҳтақ
"agluk, aglu"	pos	IPA	jaw; rainbow; jawbone	agluk tespika ‘up there there is a rainbow’; aghveghem aglaa or aghveghem awlaa ‘the whale’s jawbone’	"аглюк, аглю"
aglungqaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to have chattering teeth	aglungqaghtaghtuq ‘his teeth are chattering’ /	аглюңқаҳтаӷ-
agnepa	pos	IPA	probably; maybe; must be	particle; especially in reference to something one wishes were not so; Sangamek qamuqagka qamiyek sangyaghqwaagakek? Agnepa meghnughyingalghiinga. ‘Why has the sled that I’ve been pulling become harder to pull? It must be that I am tired.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 123); = awnepa	агныпа
agnigha-	pos	IPA	to be undecided; to hesitate	kiiwek maaqeghllagek aghvighnalukek naqam agnighaluni pinghituq ‘he had been going to cross the swift river but after hesitating he didn’t do it’; qikmiq agnighaaghlluni meghmun nalugutuq ‘the dog hesitated briefly and then jumped into the water’	агниӷа-
agniigh-	pos	IPA	to flow steadily	esneghak ilutmun agniighaqeftuk ‘the lagoon is steadily running inward’	агнӣӷ-
agniqe-	pos	IPA	"to be mad, angry  or furious (of a woman)"	applies to women only; for men's anger see qefliqe-; agniquq ‘she is angry’ / agniqutaa ‘she is angry at him or her’; Aghnam agniqutaa qikmiq neghiilghii. ‘The woman got angry at the dog when it ate [some of their food]’. (SLI JR. DICT. 11)	агниқы-
agrepae	pos	IPA	colic; sudden pain in abdomen	No information given.	агрыпаы
agtugh-	pos	IPA	to touch lightly; to come into contact; to contact	"agtughaa ‘he or it touched it lightly’ / agtuutuk ‘they2 touched each other, came into contact’; agtuutegpenani whangkunnun aghulaquq ima ‘too bad, he left without even contacting us’"	ахтуӷ-
agtughtangilleq	pos	IPA	secluded area	No information given.	ахтуҳтаңильық
agugh-	pos	IPA	bending; turning	"postural root; agughtuq ‘it bent, he made a turn on his way’; agughtaa ‘he bent it’; agughngaaq ‘it is bent’"	агуӷ-
agughpagtagh-	pos	IPA	to warp; to become crooked	"imaqun suqaq agughpagtaghtuq ‘too bad, the baleen warped’; tumet agughpagtaghngalghiit ‘a crooked road or trail’"	агуҳпахтаӷ-
agvate-	pos	IPA	to return to one’s upbringing (?)	No information given.	агваты-
agzighte-	pos	IPA	to stubbornly and sullenly delay in doing what one has been told to do; to be unresponsive when someone tries to awaken one	"agzightuq ‘he is stubbornly delaying’ / agzighneq or agzighmelnguq ‘one who delays in obeying instructions’; Taghtughtekaqsaghaqa agzighllaataghtuq. ‘I woke him up, but he is still not responding.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 12)"	агзиҳты-
ahaa	pos	IPA	yes; okay; ready	"particle; ahaa saaqesteggu taawa nengnguteggu ‘okay now go ahead and start pulling the rope’; “Qamaay! Neghsaghsi tagivaghteggu.” Arepakim pimakanga, “Ahaa tuunaqaqa.” ‘“You in there! Give me your seal.” Said Arepaki, “Okay, I am going to give it to you.”’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 27)"	агā
ahaam	pos	IPA	enough!; that's enough; all right; so be it	particle; = haam; > ahaamangam	агāм
ahaamangam	pos	IPA	enough!; that's enough; all right; so be it	"particle; mekelghiiq kilgaaqughllalghii qenwat nanevgam pimakanga, “Ahaamangam, tawatengam, meghnalilghaaten” ‘a boy was running so much, finally an old man said to him, “There, enough, rest now”’ "	агāмаңам
ahaaw	pos	IPA	is anyone there?	particle; = haaw	агāӱ
ahay	pos	IPA	what? yes? (in answer to a call)	particle	агаӥ
akag-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > akamka, akangquq"	акаг-
akagte-	pos	IPA	to clean; to scrape clean (skins and the like)	akagtaa ‘he cleaned it’ / akagtiiq ‘he cleaned something’	акахты-
akamka	pos	IPA	circle; ring	No information given.	акамка
akamkegsagh-	pos	IPA	to make (it) round	"akamkegsaghaa ‘he rounded it, made it round’"	акамкыхсаӷ-
akamkegtaq	pos	IPA	cylindrical object; round thing	No information given.	акамкыхтақ
akangquq	pos	IPA	knot in wood	akangqghwa ‘its knot’; cf. kaangquq	акаңқуқ
akeleghraaq	pos	IPA	area in between	"Taan'gantuq naayvam esnengani wallu taakut Anangiinkutlu Kegyuuqenkutlu, naantuq taakwani akeleghraaghitni aghqesaghtughvik. ‘The altar (place for making food offerings was there on the shore of the lake, or it was somewhere in the area in between Anangiq’s family’s house and Kegyuuqen’s family’s house.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:144); Taakuk ingaghtaqelghiik akeleghraaqluku, llaaghanwha ghhuusigalkanga. ‘ Whenever the two of them lay down to sleep they put him between them, and thus he didn’t get cold.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 73)"	акылыӷрāқ
akemna 	pos	IPA	that one way over there; that one outside of Alaska or outside of the St. Lawrence Island area of Alaska; that one toward the southeast	"base: akm-; obscured demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: akmum ‘(of) the one way over there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: akemkut ‘those way over there’; vocative: akemyuq ‘you, way over there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: taakemna ‘that one, way over there’; localis adverb: akmani ‘there, way over there’; terminalis adverb: akmavek ‘to way over there’; vialis adverb: akmagun ‘through way over there’; ablative adverb: akmaken ‘from way over there’; interjectional: akma ‘way over there!’; anaphoric localis adverb: taakmani ‘there, way over there’"	акымна
akeqe-	pos	IPA	to promise	akeqaa ‘he promised him’ / Akequmaanga taginnaqnilunga qayumeng. ‘He promised me (saying that) he would bring me some tea.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 4)	акықы-
akeqsagte-	pos	IPA	to threaten	akeqsagtaa ‘he threatened him’ /	акықсяхты-
akequsaq	pos	IPA	promise; promised thing; covenant	"… pikaq, “Una qayuusiq Kiyaghneghem nutaghaaguq akequsaa ….” ‘… He said, “This cup is God’s new covenant ….”’ (1 Corinthians 11.25) "	акықусяқ
akfigh-	pos	IPA	to attach a strap to a bag to use over the shoulder	No information given.	акфиӷ-
aki	pos	IPA	equivalent; other side; price; money	"akinga ‘the other side of it, its equivalent, its value or price’"	аки
aki-	pos	IPA	to reciprocate; to retaliate	No information given.	аки-
akigh-	pos	IPA	to support; to brace; to prop up	akighaa ‘he supported it’ /	акиӷ-
akiighqun	pos	IPA	meteorite found on the ground; crystal of some kind	exact identification undetermined	акӣҳқун
akiingqwaghte-	pos	IPA	to echo	akiingqwaghtuq ‘it echoed’ /	акӣңқӱаҳты-
akike-	pos	IPA	to sell; to trade (exchange)	"akikaa ‘he sold it, traded it’ /"	акикы-
akiknaq	pos	IPA	wind that blows in the opposite direction; north-northeast wind (St. Lawrence Island meaning); southwest wind (Chukotka meaning)	No information given.	акикнақ
akikugh-	pos	IPA	to sell	akikughtuq ‘he sold things’; akikughii ‘he sold them’ /	акикуӷ-
akileghtugh-	pos	IPA	to pay; to reward	akileghtughaa ‘he paid her’ / Atagpek esghapagaqaaten enkaam akileghtughllaqaaten. ‘Your Father watches you and will reward you.’ (Matthew 6.4)	акилыҳтуӷ-
akileghtuusaq	pos	IPA	pay; wages; salary	No information given.	акилыҳтӯсяқ
"akilghuu-, akilghuugh-"	pos	IPA	to yell; to scream; to use a loud voice	akilghuuguq ‘he yelled’ akilghuugaa ‘he yelled at him’ / sergeant-am akilghuumeng yuni pisqii sukalluki nengit mingllegtesqii ‘the sergeant yelled at his men to put their quarters in order’	"акилӷӯ-, акилӷӯӷ-"
akilguqe-	pos	IPA	to price high; to put a high price on something	"yupiget kiyang sangwaa akilguqigataat ‘yupik people don’t always put a high price on things’; qikmighaghhaq piyuksaghaqa akilguqaa ‘I wanted to have the puppy, but he put a high price on it’"	акилгуқы-
akiliitaq	pos	IPA	rainjacket type used with kayak	No information given.	акӣлитақ
akilpegagh-	pos	IPA	to shop; to engage in trading	"akilpegaghtuq ‘he shopped’ / akilpegaatkaa ‘he shopped for it, used it for trading’"	акильпыгаӷ-
akilpegaghvik	pos	IPA	store	No information given.	акильпыгаӷвик
akimigaq	pos	IPA	fifteen	No information given.	акимигақ
akimsuggiite-	pos	IPA	to be very cheap	No information given.	акимсюхӣты-
akin	pos	IPA	pillow; slat at either side of sled	#NAME?	акин
akingite-	pos	IPA	to be cheap; to be free; to be inexpensive	No information given.	акиңиты-
akiniigh-	pos	IPA	to raise objections; to sass; to retaliate	No information given.	акинӣӷ-
akiqagh-	pos	IPA	to fend off (as with the hands) something that is coming at one	"Salngagek qemtameng ifaghtekegket yugem akiqaghyaqminikek llaaghanwha katagunneghituk. ‘When the man fended off the box that the dropped from the attic, he kept it from spilling .’ (SULUWET 109)"	акиқаӷ-
akiqu-	pos	IPA	to sass back	No information given.	акиқу-
"akisqaghtaan, akisqaghtaasiq"	pos	IPA	flashlight	"used in the dual, akisqaghtaatek, or akisqaghtaasik, for one flashlight"	"акисқаҳтāн, акисқаҳтāсиқ"
akisqaghte-	pos	IPA	to shine light; to flash light; to reflect light	akisqaghtuq ‘it shined; akisqaghtaa ‘it shined on it’ / Mamlegmi yugem tumeni akisqaghtaa. ‘The man shined a light on his path.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 20)	акисқаҳты-
akisqaghun	pos	IPA	light source; mirror; reflection	No information given.	акисқаӷун
akite-	pos	IPA	to reciprocate; to respond; to answer; to take revenge	akitaa ‘he reciprocated toward her’ / akitaa aapsatni unaanguluku igleghnaqutni ‘he answered him when he asked if he were leaving early in the morning’; akitaa ilani tuyuusameng tuunyatni kameraaghegneng ‘he sent back a present in return for the rubber boots his friend had given him’	акиты-
Akitfak	pos	IPA	site on coast north from Powooiliak on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Акитфак
Akitfawaaq	pos	IPA	site on Powooiliak Bay at the west end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Акитфаӱāқ
akitukneghu-	pos	IPA	to be stubborn	No information given.	акитукньыӷу-
akituqaq	pos	IPA	expensive thing	No information given.	акитуқақ
akitutala	pos	IPA	price; cost; value	No information given.	акитуталя
akitutaligh-	pos	IPA	to estimate cost or value	No information given.	акитуталиӷ-
akituusaq	pos	IPA	gift given in return for something; an action (good or bad) done in reciprocation; answer; payback	No information given.	акитӯсяқ
akivaq	pos	IPA	southwest; far south	akivaaghtaa ‘the wind turned toward the south’	акивақ
akivigte-	pos	IPA	to prop up skin boat on its side	cf. akigh-; reported also (in R) as akevegte- ‘to turn over’	акивихты-
aklegaq	pos	IPA	arrow used on birds	No information given.	акльыгақ
aklek	pos	IPA	barb of hook or harpoon tip; notch in arrowhead	"also used in the dual, aklegek, for one barb or notch"	акльык
aklighyaget	pos	IPA	highest level of the atmosphere	a plural	акльиӷьягыт
aklu-	pos	IPA	to be in need; to lack something	"akluuq ‘he needs something’ / aklukaa ‘he lacks it’; aklumalghii ‘one in need, poor person’; aklumrugnilnguq ‘one comfortably well off’"	аклью-
akluma-	pos	IPA	to be poor	"Aklumalleghpigaq Quyanalleghpigaq Kuusma ‘The Poorest Most Thankful Christmas’ (KALLAG. 36); Uteghmun sumeghtaghaatkennemkun Kuusmelleghput nengllugutkullghiini qerngaaghhaamta, aklumaghngaamta, kayutkuteqaghlluta. ‘When I think back (I realize) that we had Christmas being a family gathered together even though we were poor helping each other.’ (KALLAG. 51); cf. aklungi"	акльюма-
aklumalghii	pos	IPA	poor (poverty stricken) person	"Ama kiyaghlleghhii aghnaq aklumalghii, ugilek avaqutaghtuqaq, aatgha Arepaki. ‘And there lived a poor woman, with a husband and lots of children, named Arepaki.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 25); cf. aklungi"	акльюмалӷӣ
aklunagh-	pos	IPA	to be rare; to be scarce	No information given.	акльюнаӷ-
aklunaq	pos	IPA	time of scarcity; something needed	No information given.	акльюнақ
aklunghighi-	pos	IPA	to become rich; to become wealthy	aklunghighiiq ‘he became rich’ /	акльюнӷиӷи-
aklungi	pos	IPA	wealth; riches	aklunginga ‘his wealth’	акльюңи
aklungite-	pos	IPA	"to be rich, wealthy"	"aklungilnguq ‘wealthy person, place abounding in resources’"	акльюңиты-
akmaataq	pos	IPA	rope or shoulder strap for shoulder load	No information given.	акмьāтақ
akmag-	pos	IPA	to backpack; to carry on one’s back	"akmagtuq ‘he backpacked something’; akmagaa ‘he backpacked it, carried it on his back ‘/"	акмьаг-
akmagin	pos	IPA	strap of backpack	No information given.	акмьагин
akmagtaghraak	pos	IPA	handbag	No information given.	акмьахтаӷрāк
akmagtalek	pos	IPA	fin whale	Chukotkan (V&E); exact identification undetermined	акмьахталык
akmagtaq	pos	IPA	backpack	No information given.	акмьахтақ
akmagun	pos	IPA	strap of backpack	No information given.	акмьагун
akmagutaq	pos	IPA	barrel	also used in the dual akmagutak for one barrel	акмьагутақ
akmak	pos	IPA	backpack; pack; thing carried on back	No information given.	акмьак
akmakuraq	pos	IPA	spare rope or raincoat	Chukotkan (R);	акмьакурақ
akmaliighaq	pos	IPA	least auklet (Aethia pusilla)	cf. akmak	акмьалӣӷақ
akmaneghpalluq	pos	IPA	camel; one with a large backload	used in Bible translations for ‘camel’	акмьаныҳпальюқ
akmaneq	pos	IPA	load on back; thing on back	No information given.	акмьанық
akneqaq	pos	IPA	protrusion or projection to keep something from slipping	baseball bat-em iquga akneqalek peskugaghiitaq ‘a baseball bat’s end has something to keep it from slipping’; unaghsim akneqaa peskugaghiitaqluku angyam waapenga petugaa ‘the boat’s rope is fastened near the projection of the piece of wood lest it slip off’	акньықақ
aksaqe-	pos	IPA	to keep a secret; to hide something	aksaqaa ‘he's keeping it a secret’ / aksaqiiq ‘he's keeping secrets’; aksaqegkaq ‘secrecy’; Aghnaghaghhaam aksaqaa ungipaq aangelghii. ‘The little girl kept secret the big news.’ (SLI JR. DICT.20); Atagpek liisimakaa aksaqluku sallghen enkaam akileghtughlleqaaten. ‘Your Father knows in secret what you do and will reward you.’ (Matthew 6.6a)	аксяқы-
aksaqumtaaq	pos	IPA	secret	No information given.	аксяқумтāқ
aksig-	pos	IPA	to paddle with an oar outward from the boat so as to make it turn	aksigaa ‘he turned it (boat)’ / aksigun ‘an oar used specifically for this purpose’; (?)	аксиг-
aksigu-	pos	IPA	to adjust the wick and flame in a seal oil lamp	aksiwaa ‘he adjusted it’ / aksigun ‘wick-adjusting device’	аксигу-
akugaaq	pos	IPA	several days ago; the other day; yesterday	particle: akugaaq ima kaasimalghii Sivungameng ‘he arrived several days ago from Savoonga’	акугāқ
akughaghqagh-	pos	IPA	to pick roots	No information given.	акуӷаҳқаӷ-
akughaq	pos	IPA	"groin; edible plant root, especially of mountain sorel (Oxria dignya)"	No information given.	акуӷақ
akughqun	pos	IPA	something to be eaten	No information given.	акуҳқун
akughte-	pos	IPA	to apply water; to mix seal oil and blood; to dilute; to soak	akughtaa ‘she put water in or on it’ / yugem akughtaak saguyagni anglanaghtesqellukek ‘the man moistened his drum skin to make it sound better’	акуҳты-
akughtu-	pos	IPA	to be long or too long (of garments); to have long roots	akughtuuq ‘it is (too) long’	акуҳту-
akughtugh-	pos	IPA	to stretch one's hands or arms to reach; to reach out	akughtughtuq ‘he stretched his arms out’; akughtughaa ‘he reached out to him’ / taghnughhaq akughtughtuq naaminun ‘the baby reached out to his mother’; taghnughhaam talligni akughtuutaak ‘the baby reached out its arms’	акуҳтуӷ-
akughun	pos	IPA	dish filled with water that is used to moisten a drum after a shaman’s seance	No information given.	акуӷун
akughutaq	pos	IPA	an old-time Eskimo religous ceremony	No information given.	акуӷутақ
"akughvigaq*, akughvigasak"	pos	IPA	"skin-boot of shaved sealskin, knee-high, waterproof, and used for hunting"	No information given.	"акуӷвигақ, акуӷвигасяк"
akulae	pos	IPA	midst; middle; center; space between things; middle (second) float on whaling gear	akula qaamna wata kangsuuteghllaguuq eslalighneghmineng qerngughtaaghni quyngini taagani ‘the middle part of that herd of reindeer is more tightly bunched together than the part toward the outside of the herd’	акуляы
akulghaaghet	pos	IPA	walrus hide armor with baleen and ivory fittings; place name on St. Lawrence Island	No information given.	акулӷāӷыт
akuliite-	pos	IPA	to position or place in the midst; to infiltrate; to mix in	aghnaghaghhaq akuliituq angayuqaghmikun qenwat ‘the little girl finally positioned herself between her parents’	акулӣты-
akuliq	pos	IPA	middle; center; core; part in between	akuliqaq ‘something that has a middle or center part added to it’; nekevuutngalghiini akuliq mekelghiiq angvigalqaat. ‘Of the ones standing the boy in the middle is the biggest one of them.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 22)	акулиқ
Akulkek	pos	IPA	site at point north and west of Akeftapak on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Акюлькык
akulkestaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	narrow thing; frequent occurrence	"akulkestaaghhaaguq ‘it is narrow, frequent’"	акулькыстāҳақ
akulkestaalleq	pos	IPA	narrowest part; most crowded part	No information given.	акулькыстāльық
akullghute-	pos	IPA	to mix or become mixed into a crowd or mass	"often of people, with the implication that it is done stealthily; yulghutnun akullghusalghiimi ima aga puygunginaamaan aglalleghqani tukughminun ‘when he got into the midst of the crowd of people he quickly forgot that he was supposed to return to the family he was staying with’; naten kii, akullghullaataghta mekelghiiq, legan wiin anaavagyaghtesnaniqaghput unaaq anuqmeng apalluqlu? ‘how did that boy leave our midst to go hunting for birds with a net after we told him not to go this morning on account of the strong wind?’"	акульҳуты-
akullute-	pos	IPA	to jumble things; to mix things up	nekeghqughwaaqat akullusaqunaki taakut ‘don’t jumble the things that are neatly arranged’	акульюты-
akulpeghte-	pos	IPA	to add something in the middle	tapghaq sakeqsiqaq akulpeghtaghlluku atughaghput ‘we used it in the middle repairing the worn rope’; negaghpak akulpeghlluku qukaakun pinilghiimeng simighaqa ‘I exchanged it with a good section putting it in as the middle part of the gilnet’	акульпыҳты-
akulpeq	pos	IPA	something added in the middle	No information given.	акульпық
akulqusuk	pos	IPA	crack between boards or rocks	No information given.	акульқусюк
akultu-	pos	IPA	to be far apart; to be widely spaced	akultuut ‘they are widely spaced ‘/ iiskek akultupigtak taam aghnam ‘that woman's eyes are far apart’	акульту-
akultughte-	pos	IPA	"to become farther apart, less frequent, or less crowded"	"akultughtuq or akultughtaa ‘it has become less frequent, less crowded, etc.’ / qiighwlleghqek akultughtaak ‘his coughing spells are becoming less frequent’; tuqlughillgha wata akultughtaa ‘he is calling less frequently now’"	акультуҳты-
akumae	pos	IPA	granulated sugar	direct nominalization of akume-; Akuma tagivaghhu. ‘Pass the sugar.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 23)	акумаы
akume-	pos	IPA	to put sugar or other things in; to add extra ingredients	akumaa ‘he put sugar (or something else) in it’ / akumutuq ‘he mingled with the others or put in something for himself’; akumutaa ‘he put it into something’	акумы-
akumighaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to interrupt other’s talking	aleghquullghiini wiin akumighaghtaghtuten nepiiqaa ‘please be quiet; you’ve interrupted the conversation’	акумиӷаҳтаӷ-
akumkaghqaq	pos	IPA	ingredient to be added	Sangisiin akumkaghqameng piinsuukemun? ‘Don’t you have anything to add to the beans?’ (SLI JR. DICT. 23)	акумкаҳқақ
akuq	pos	IPA	root of plant	akwaa ‘its root’	акуқ
akuqagh-	pos	IPA	to grab; catch; to accept a decision or an offer quickly	akuqaghaa ‘he grabbed it’ /	акуқаӷ-
akusqaghtaq	pos	IPA	rumor; news told before it becomes certain	No information given.	акусқаҳтақ
akusqaghte-	pos	IPA	to spread a rumor or news before it becomes certain	Akusqaghtaghtut un’ga kinkut angyiit aghvengniluki. ‘They are quickly spreading the word that someone’s boat out there has caught a whale.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 23)	акусқаҳты-
akuuraate-	pos	IPA	to be there when something happens; to arrive on time; to be in the right place at the right time	akuuraatuq ‘he was there at the right time’; akuuraataa ‘he brought it on time’ / akuuraatuq Neghestikun maapiluni ‘he arrived just in time for Thanksgiving’	акӯрāты-
akuuragh-	pos	IPA	to be at the same place or same time	exact meaning/use questioned; akuuraqwaaquuq ‘he always seems to be hunting in the right place at the right time and catches something’	акӯраӷ-
akuutaq	pos	IPA	"dough; mixture; baked item of food; Eskimo ""ice cream"""	No information given.	акӯтақ
akuute-	pos	IPA	to mix; to knead	akuutuq ‘he is mixing something; akuutaa ‘he is mixing it’ /	акӯты-
akuynaq	pos	IPA	time when people are in a hurry; rush; rush hour	akuynaq pivagilgan estugaghmun akilpegaghyaghnaqunga ‘before it gets really busy I’m going to go shop at the store’; akuynami sangwaa puyguyaqunaan ‘don’t forget something during the rush’	акуӥнақ
akuzi-	pos	IPA	to speak	akuziiq ‘he spoke /	акузи-
akuzilleq	pos	IPA	word; manner of speech	Aghnaghaam akuzillgha whangkunneng allanguuq. ‘The girl’s speech is different from ours.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 24)	акузильық
akuzilqusiigh-	pos	IPA	to make sharp remarks	No information given.	акузильқусӣӷ-
akuzimleghagh-	pos	IPA	to whisper	akuzimleghaghtuq ‘he whispered’ /	акузимлыӷаӷ-
akuzin	pos	IPA	word	"Piinlighyuwhaalleghmeng Akuzin tawantekaq, … ‘ In the beginning was the Word, …’ (John 1.1)"	акузин
akuzipig-	pos	IPA	to speak Yupik	akuzipigtuq ‘he spoke in the St. Lawrence Is. / Siberian Yupik Eskimo language’	акузипиг-
akuzipik	pos	IPA	the St. Lawrence Is. / Siberian Yupik Eskimo language	akuzipigestun ‘in the St. Lawrence Is. / Siberian Yupik Eskimo language’	акузипик
akuzite-	pos	IPA	to advise; to urge; to try to persuade	akuzitaa ‘he is advising him’ /	акузиты-
akuziviighqe-	pos	IPA	to scold without good reason	Chukotkan (R)	акузивӣҳқақы-
akuziyiilnguq	pos	IPA	speechless person; mute person	Chukotkan	акузиӥӣлңуқ
akwaangigh-	pos	IPA	to increase in volume or number or frequency	akwaangightuq ‘it is become more numerous or frequent’ / tepam tepellgha akwaangighyalghiimi esnighqwat tepaghsilghutut ‘when more and more sea life got washed ashore the beachcombers got their fill of sea life’; qawaagem tagillgha akwaangightuq ‘the arrival of birds is becoming more frequent’	акхӱāңиӷ-
alaaqitke-	pos	IPA	to get something and then lose it right away	alaaqitkaa ‘he got it and then lost it’ / unangkaghteng tugungwaaghluku alaaqitkaat ‘they retrieved the seal they killed but then they lost it’	аля̄қиткы-
alaghrang	pos	IPA	furthermore; also; might as well; it turns out	"particle; shows the insistence on something or the continued existence of certain circumstances; siivanlleghita qelghii aatkani kinengllaghaghtesqelluki, alaghrang gaaghaghutqaghtesqumaghmi piiq ‘their elder implored them to dry his clothes and also he begged them to cook for him right away’; tengegkayuget wiintakusikat alaghrang aviitut ‘the airplane that was delayed never did come’; alaghrang piyaafqaama, anuqa iknaqataghapigta wiin ‘I might as well not go because the wind is a little too strong’; ‘Ighennaq alaghrang aghulangigateftuq kayagtaghwaaghyaghaghput pipagningitngwaaghtuq. ‘Ighennaq, it turns out, doesn’t dance. We tried having him dance, but he wouldn’t at all.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:132)"	аляӷраң
alaghuutaghte-	pos	IPA	to have a premonition; to expect something to happen	"sameng alaghuutaghsigasiin? ‘haven’t you been expecting something to happen?’; sangwaat alaghuutaghsigatut ‘nothing was sensed, expected’"	аляӷӯтаҳты-
alagyipa	pos	IPA	a pie made from reindeer fat and chopped boiled meat	Chukotkan	алягӥипа
alaka	pos	IPA	spirit that takes the form of a killer whale	No information given.	аляка
alamkae	pos	IPA	partition between compartments of a ruminant's stomach	No information given.	алямкаы
alamsa-	pos	IPA	to want to eat more	alamsaaq ‘he wants to eat more’ / neghepanghitem entaqun alamsaghllaguuq ‘he wants to eat more perhaps on account of not having eaten much’	алямся-
alangghu-	pos	IPA	missing something; at a loss	"emotional root; alangghuyugtuq ‘he misses something, he is feeling a loss’; alangghukaa or alangghuyukaa ‘he feels its loss, feels that he didn't have enough time with it’; asagan mekelghiighhaq tuqulghii elngaatall alangghuyukaa qevuulluku ‘the aunt of the boy who just died is bemoaning the shortness of his life’"	аляңӷу-
alangqughiitaq	pos	IPA	ring	No information given.	аляңқуӷӣтақ
alangquq	pos	IPA	ring finger	alangqghwa ‘his ring finger’	аляңқуқ
alaqitke-	pos	IPA	to lose game right after catching it	"alaqitkaa ‘he got it and lost it soon after’/ unangkaghteng tugungwaaghluku alaqitkaat ‘after taking hold of the seal they’d caught, they lost it’; alaqitkesaqunaan tugunaqiteggu ‘try to bring it in without losing it’; a in the second syllable is also reported as long"	аляқиткы-
alayulgen	pos	IPA	commode	Chukotkan	аляюлгын
alefa	pos	IPA	elephant	Chukotkan; St. Lawrence Islanders use kamagraq for this;  the elephant is known only through contact with outsiders	алыфа
aleghqugh- 	pos	IPA	to speak to someone; to advise	"aleghqughtuq ‘he spoke to someone’; aleghqughaa ‘he spoke to him, giving him advice’ / aleghquutuk ‘they2 conversed’"	алыҳқуӷ-
aleghquma-	pos	IPA	to stay with a companion; to keep company	No information given.	алыҳқума-
aleghqumseghagh-	pos	IPA	to whisper; to joke; to tease; to speak lightly (in any sense)	aleghqumseghaghtuq ‘he whispered’; aleghqumseghaghaa ‘he whispered to her’ /	алыҳқумсыӷаӷ-
aleghqumsug-	pos	IPA	to chat; to gossip	No information given.	алыҳқумсюг-
aleghquusiq	pos	IPA	telephone; CB; two-way radio	"also used in the dual, aleghquusik, for one such device"	алыҳқӯсиқ
alemeng	pos	IPA	but; on the contrary; contrary to what has been said	"particle; angyaghnguq tengsimaa, alemeng petugteghwaaqaayaghtuq ‘it (the wind) blew the boat away but then it seemed that it had been securely tied up’; alemeng amiklu sanighyiqaqsaghaqa naqamqun qelpanniit ‘they said it was open but contrary to what had been said I had locked the door’; “Mekelghiighmi ugani, hiik, aanestaaten aghnaghaam.” “Aa, aanestanga.” “Kii, alemeng nengaakegkanka taglaanneghminiki aanesigatii.  Taawa ellnganitaqut.  Allallu aanesigatii.” ‘“You boy (by the door), wow, the woman let you out?” “Yes, she let me out.” “Wow, in contrast to that, she doesn't let my sons-in-law out when she brings them home. They stay with her. They don’t go out anymore.”’ (AYUM. UNGIP. III:12)"	алымың
aleq	pos	IPA	companion; other of a pair; second one; afterbirth	aallgha ‘his companion’ (note the irregular voicelessness of llgh); aallgha igaasim pigu ‘you can have the other pencil’; aallghituq ‘it doesn’t have a mate’; alelguuq ‘he has a companion’	алық
alevegh-	pos	IPA	to want more food	aleveghtuq ‘he wants more food’; aleveghnaqlaataghtuten neqeput palapiguut ‘you’re wanting more again and  our food isn’t so plentiful’; neqmeng nuughtem alevghuteghllaguut ‘on account of the shortage of food everyone wants more’	алывыӷ-
aleveghte-	pos	IPA	to want more	aleveghtuq ‘he wants more’ / neqmeng nuughtem aleveghtut ‘because of the food shortage they want more’	алывыҳты-
alghapaghagh-	pos	IPA	to walk side by side with (him)	alghapaghaghaa ‘he walked side by side with him’ / 	алӷапаӷаӷ-
alghapagti-	pos	IPA	to walk side by side	No information given.	алӷапахти-
alghapak	pos	IPA	companion; partner; second wife	No information given.	алӷапак
algharengriiq	pos	IPA	beach caterpillar	No information given.	алӷарыңрӣқ
alghigh-	pos	IPA	to repeat; to do for a second time; to accompany	alghightuq ‘he doing it for a second time’; alghighaa ‘he added a second one to it ‘/ alghightuq qayumeng ‘he had a second cup of tea’; Sivungaghhnaqelghii laluramka alghighaa yugem ‘the man is accompanying the white person going to Savoonga’	алӷиӷ-
alguma-	pos	IPA	to covet something; to want more (food or the like)	algumaaq ‘he covets something ‘/	алгума-
algumake-	pos	IPA	to covet	algumakaa ‘he covets it’ /	алгумакы-
ali-	pos	IPA	out of sight	"root; > aliigh-, aliighte-, aliinaghlluk, aliiqaqu-, aliite-"	али-
aliftugh-	pos	IPA	to miscarry	nulighha aliftughtuq maalghugegneng ‘his wife miscarried twice’	алифтуӷ-
aliga- 	pos	IPA	to long to go somewhere or to see someone	aligaaq ‘he longs to go’ / aligavikegkaq ‘a longed-for person’	алига-
aligake-	pos	IPA	to long to go to	aligakaa ‘he longs to go to him or it’	алигакы-
aligate-	pos	IPA	to strongly wish to go	aligataqsaghtunga iitek esghaghyaghtughnalusi ‘I am longing to go and see you all’; aligallghii maligunnaluni qenwat aangghaghput ‘she was determined to go so we acquiesced’	алигаты-
aligavike-	pos	IPA	to long to go to	aligavikaa ‘he longs to go to him or it’	алигавикы-
alignagh-	pos	IPA	to have shamanistic power; to be a shaman	cf. alinge-	алигнаӷ-
alignaghtaagh-	pos	IPA	to perform supernatural acts through shamanism	alignalghiit ilagaghluteng alignaghtaaghusimalghiit ‘the shamans performed their supernatural acts singing their songs’	алигнаҳтāӷ-
alignaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to have shamanistic powers	No information given.	алигнаҳтаӷ-
alignalghii	pos	IPA	shaman	alignaghtaaghusiq ‘shaman's apparatus’	алигналӷӣ
alignaq	pos	IPA	shaman's power	cf. alinge-	алигнақ
aliigh-	pos	IPA	to appear; for weather to clear up	aliightuq or aliighaa ‘it cleared up’ /	алӣӷ-
aliighagh-	pos	IPA	to keep one's hands inside his parka sleeves	No information given.	алӣӷаӷ-
aliighte-	pos	IPA	to reveal; to show; to bring into view	aliightaa ‘he brought it into view’ / 	алӣҳты-
aliilleq	pos	IPA	birthday	Chukotkan (V&E)	алӣльық
aliineghlluk	pos	IPA	clear weather	No information given.	алӣныҳльюк
aliineq	pos	IPA	"clear, calm day"	aliinghunani ‘whenever it was a calm day’	алӣнық
aliiqaqu-	pos	IPA	to be intermittently visible or audible; for weather to be intermittently clear	qagim eftii aliiqaquut ‘the sound of the waves can be heard now and then’	алӣқақу-
aliisigate-	pos	IPA	to be invisible; to be inaudible	ilagalghiit ritigugni aliisigatut ‘the singers on the radio can't be heard’	алӣсигаты-
aliite-	pos	IPA	to be visible; to be audible	No information given.	алӣты-
alike-	pos	IPA	to be afraid of (him/it); to fear	"alikaa ‘he is afraid of him or it’ / cf. alinge-, alikumtaaq"	аликы-
alikumtaaq	pos	IPA	something that is very much feared	cf. alike-	аликумтāқ
alinge-	pos	IPA	to be afraid; be scared	alinguq ‘he is afraid’ / aghnaghaghhaam piigyamigu kaviighem amiraa pinilleghpigaq atama pinga elngaatall alingumalghii sumeghtaghaamalghii ‘when the girl tore her father's best fox skin she became very scared and worried’; ‘mekelghiighhaq alingluni yullunaaghllagmeng movie-yaghvigmi anqaghsimalghii the little boy got scared of the monster in the movie and ran out’; cf. alike-	алиңы-
alingengite-	pos	IPA	to be fearless	alingengituq ‘he’s not afraid’ /	алиңыңиты-
alingnagh-	pos	IPA	to be frightening; to be intimidating	alingnaghtuq ‘it is frightening’ / kallugek alingnaghtuk aanglutek leveklugtalleghqek ‘thunder is frightening when its clap is exceptionally loud’; umiilek taana alingnapigtuq ‘that important person is intimidating’	алиңнаӷ-
alingnaghhalek	pos	IPA	how scarey!	particle	алиңнаҳалык
alingnaq	pos	IPA	frightening thing; scary thing; intimidating person	No information given.	алиңнақ
alingruugh-	pos	IPA	to be terrified; to panic	elngaatall alingruughtunga kumaghyan mangteghaghput ‘I was in a panic when our house caught fire’	алиңрӯӷ-
alingseghagh-	pos	IPA	to try to scare; to purposely frighten	"often with the implication of ""teaching a lesson""; alingseghaghtuq ‘he frightened someone’; alingseghaghaa ‘he frightened him’ / anengaan mekelghiighhaq alingseghaghaa gginaqwaalluugmeng ‘his older brother frightened the child with a scary mask’; nanevgam alingseghaghaa eltughani yakughnameng sikuk pilgulleghqaanayukayek piyaanaqeghllak ‘the old man tried to dissuade his grandson when he wanted to go out hunting by warning him of the possible danger of the sea ice’"	алиңсыӷаӷ-
alingsequ-	pos	IPA	to make a threatening gesture	qikmiq alingsequluku unaghsimeng qimagtestaa ‘he threatened the dog with a stick so it ran off’	алиңсықу-
alingtagh-	pos	IPA	to be cowardly; to be habitually fearful; to be unduly cautious	"alingtaghtuq ‘he is habitually fearful’ / alingtalghii ‘coward, one who is habitually or excessively fearful or anxious’"	алиңтаӷ-
alingtasak	pos	IPA	coward	No information given.	алиңтасяк
alingtiiritaq	pos	IPA	amulet; good luck charm; charm put near entrance of house to protect  inhabitants	No information given.	алиңтӣритақ
alingughagh-	pos	IPA	to wince; to flinch	aghnalqwaaq ifkavzightuq alingughaghluni mekelghiighham kagsagtevzighyatni uziftameng tapghaaghpawaalegmeng ‘the little old woman almost fell from her chair when she flinched because of the boy's stringed twirler toy’	алиңуӷаӷ-
alingughyug-	pos	IPA	to cower; to be timid	"alingughyugluni yaywaalingiighhaq aaptineghmeng neghyaghqameng aqumtaaghumalghii aghnelqusiq eslami ‘too timid to ask for something to eat, the poor little orphan sat outside all day long’"	алиңуӷьюг-
alingutke-	pos	IPA	to be concerned about; to worry about	alingutkaa ‘he is worried about it or him’ / itegaqa puuvaatalghii qenwat alingutkaqa ‘I'm worried about my foot because it keeps swelling’	алиңуткы-
alingyug-	pos	IPA	to be fearful or apprehensive	often of darkness or of being alone; mekelghiighhaq alingyugumalghii ellnginaghhaaghsami mangteghami unugumaan ‘the little boy became apprehensive when he was left alone in the house as evening's darkness fell’	алиңьюг-
aliq	pos	IPA	sleeve; lean-to storage room on side of house	No information given.	алиқ
alitaan	pos	IPA	fur trim on sleeve of parka	No information given.	алитāн
alkuuqaq	pos	IPA	"extension of hallway part of roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	Chukotkan (R)	алькӯқақ
alkwaagh-	pos	IPA	to cover or be covered (by a large number or mass of objects)	"perhaps specifically of an area covered by  birds, fish, etc.; iqallugameng uga esnaq aklwaaghluni ayuquq ‘it seems like the beach down there is partially covered by all the tom-cod’; sukilpaq kiwani naayghami nalupiggneghmini repall uyghaget alkwaaghluki ‘sometimes where there are so many auklets on the north side of the mountain they practically cover a large area of rock’"	алькӱāӷ-
alkwaaq	pos	IPA	mass of objects covering an area	No information given.	алькӱāқ
alla	pos	IPA	other thing; different thing; more; again	allanguuq ‘it is different’; allastun ‘in a different way’; also a particle: alla tuuninga tamaaken ‘give me more of that kind’; alla piltung ‘let's do it again’	алья
allaaghlluggaq*	pos	IPA	magic; mystery; miracle; unusual and attractive thing	No information given.	алья̄ҳльюхақ
allaghhiinaq	pos	IPA	of all different kinds; of various kinds	particle; Iyataamaghpek kiyaghtegpenang; neghaqi. Neqa allaghhiinaq  uglapigtuq. ‘Don’t stay hungry; eat!. Food of all different kinds is plentiful.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 72)	альяҳӣнақ
allaghqi-	pos	IPA	to make a mistake; to err; to say or do something unexpected	No information given.	альяҳқи-
allaghquute-	pos	IPA	to miss hitting the spot aimed at; to arrive earlier or later than planned	No information given.	альяҳқӯты-
allakaayaq	pos	IPA	different thing	No information given.	альякāяқ
allakagh-	pos	IPA	alone; separately from others	used in the quantifier/qualifier construction; allakaan ‘he by himself’; allakaghmeng ‘they separately the ohters’; Ugusami aghnaghaam angayuqani ugkemeng manisfikluki ugkemeng ellmi allakaghmi taagken iitghumalghii ungavigmun. ‘When it was cooked the girl took food to her parents and then went into the inner sleeping enclosure by herself.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH.  161)	альякаӷ-
allakagh-	pos	IPA	"to become independent (of one’s family, or the like)"	allakaghtuq ‘he broke away and became independent’/ yuuk ellmineng angyangyami allakaghtuq ‘ the man became independent when he got a boat for himself’	альякаӷ-
allakaghtaq	pos	IPA	strange thing or person	No information given.	альякаҳтақ
allakaghte-	pos	IPA	to separate oneself from the others	yuuk ellmineng angyangyani allakaghtuq ‘when the man got a boat of his own he went off from the others’	альякаҳты-
allakaniq*	pos	IPA	slightly different thing	No information given.	альяканиқ
allake-	pos	IPA	to find (it) different or unfamiliar	allakaa ‘he considers it different from what it was or from what he expected it to be’ / allakamken elngaatall anglighllagumaaten esghallemneng ima kiik ‘I notice a big difference in you since you have grown so much since I saw you last summer’; elngaatall allakaa gginaan naten lliillgha tuquyugutanganeng aawhkaghhaaneng ‘he noticed the big difference in the appearance of her face due to her long illness’; allakutuk ‘they2 find each other different’; allaki ‘to notice a difference’	альякы-
allakunginagh-	pos	IPA	to get confused; to go haywire	"allakunginaghtuq ‘he is confused, it is going haywire’ /"	альякуңинаӷ-
allameng	pos	IPA	more; some more; again	particle	альямың
allaneghtaq	pos	IPA	one from outside of group; non- or new member; outsider	"either one outside a group, or a recent additon to a group from outside; ataasiiguq allaneghtaghput angyami ‘the number of non-crewmembers in the boat is one’; quyakamken allaneghtaghqaq ‘I’m glad you’re joining’; allaneghtaaguq ‘he’s an outsider’"	альяныҳтақ
allangughte-	pos	IPA	to change; to become different	allangughtuq ‘it changed’ /	альяңуҳты-
allanighutkaghqaq	pos	IPA	variety of birds	Chukotkan (R); exact meaning ?	альяниӷуткаҳқақ
allaniigh-	pos	IPA	to commit adultery	No information given.	альянӣӷ-
allanqik	pos	IPA	once again; additionally	particle; ayveghaghluteng enkaam ama allanqik nanughaghlutengllu ‘they had caught a walrus and additionally a polar bear!’; allanqik aghvenglaataamaat awatangaghniistun ‘they caught a whale once again as they did last year’	альянқик
allapetqa	pos	IPA	more; again	Chukotkan (R); particle	альяпытқа
allataq	pos	IPA	someone else’s thing	Chukotkan (R); ellngan ayemsimaa allataq igaasiq ‘he broke someone else’s pencil in half’	альятақ
allayug-	pos	IPA	to feel strange or out of place	allayugtuq ‘he feels strange or feels that he's in strange surroundings’	альяюг-
alleg-	pos	IPA	to sweep; to brush off	"allegtuq ‘he swept’; aallgaa ‘he swept it’ / aallgaquq ‘he sweeps, or, he is sweeping’; cf. palleg-"	альыг-
allegek 	pos	IPA	"shaman's broom used to ""brush off""  illness; dumping place for lamp sediment or disease"	No information given.	альыгык
allegvike-	pos	IPA	to infect	allegvikaa ‘he infected her’ / Mekelghiighhaam petamineng allegvikii igaghyam ilangi.’ The little boy spread his chicken pox to a part of the school.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 24)	альыгвикы-
allegviknagh-	pos	IPA	to be susceptible to contagion	No information given.	альыгвикньаӷ-
allgegh-	pos	IPA	to appear; to emerge; to be born	"allgeghtuq ‘it appeared, he was born’ / allgeghtaa ‘he brought it into existence, he obtained it’; kiighwyat allgeghtut ‘the northern lights appeared’; naken allgeghtaqsigu? ‘where did you get it?’; allgeghtaq ‘something acquired’; allgeghutaa ‘he obtained or created something for it’; Pingayut yuget allgeghtut naaygham awatanganeng. ‘Three men appeared from behind the mountain.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 24); Aghnam taghnughhaghaa allgeqaaguq upenghami. ‘The woman’s baby was born in the spring.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 24)"	альхыӷ-
allgeghvik	pos	IPA	birthday	No information given.	альхыӷвик
allgelleq	pos	IPA	birthday	No information given.	альхыльық
allghiinegh-	pos	IPA	to be disobedient; to be capricious; to follow one’s own wishes only	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	альҳӣныӷ-
allghuu-	pos	IPA	to be the first boat that comes to aid a boat that is catching a whale	angyat ataasit allghuugut ‘one boat went to aid in harpooning a whale’; kinkut allghuugat? ‘who are the first who come to help?’; allghuulget aghveghem nalighneghaneng pikayuget ‘usually the first boat that comes to help gets a choice part of the whale’	альҳӯ-
alligh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root > allighaq, allighta"	альиӷ-
allighagh-	pos	IPA	to prepare a bed	cf. allighaq	альиӷаӷ-
allighaq	pos	IPA	mattress	also plural for one	альиӷақ
allighsiigh-	pos	IPA	to make socks	No information given.	альиҳсӣӷ-
allighta	pos	IPA	skin sock (deerskin for women; sealskin for men)	No information given.	альиҳта
allighteraaq	pos	IPA	sock knitted of yarn; foot wrapping used in place of a sock	No information given.	альиҳтырāқ
alligte-	pos	IPA	to remain in an obscured place; to go and not return; to stay away too long	ayveq ayvasaasluku atghaghluni alligtuq ‘a walrus that we wounded went down and did not come up again’; esngihqwaghluni alleglleghii payugtaqa ‘when he went beachcoming and stayed away I went to check on him’; kevgaqa nani alligtuq ‘the one I sent on an errand got delayed somewhere’	альихты-
allngig-	pos	IPA	to sew a patch onto a boot sole	"naatghiimaak kaamgegka, allngikaghqek ‘my boots have worn out soles, please patch them’"	альңиг-
allngik1 	pos	IPA	patch on boot sole	No information given.	альңик1
allngik2	pos	IPA	school of fish	Chukotkan (R); allngiguluni iqalluk igleghsimaaq ‘the fish went in a school’	альңик2
allngugh-	pos	IPA	to submerge; to dive under water	allngughtuq ‘it dove’ / allngughvikaa ‘he dove into it or dove after it’; kangghwaak allngughtuq ‘the duck dove into the water’	альңуӷ-
allngughte-	pos	IPA	to tan (a bird skin) for use	atkugkat qawaagem amiirii allngughlluki wetku ulimaaqiit ‘the bird skins are tanned before they are made into a parka’; atkugkameng aghnaq allngughtiiq ‘the woman is tanning bird skins to make a parka’	альңьуҳты-
allnguqayuk	pos	IPA	diving bird or other thing; submarine	No information given.	альңьуқаюк
allughqaq	pos	IPA	adopted child	cf. allughqi-	альюҳқақ
allughqi-	pos	IPA	to adopt (a child)	allughqiiq ‘he adopted (a child)’; allughqii ‘he adopted him ‘/ allughqilleqaa ‘he will adopt him’	альюҳқи-
allughqikaq	pos	IPA	adopted child	No information given.	альюҳқикақ
allumyagte-	pos	IPA	to act on (it) almost but not quite in its entirety; to get the most out of what is available; to have done most of what was to be done; for most of what was to occur to have happened	tepaghllaga esnam saghnayaqmegteggu allumyagtaat ‘they gathered almost all the sea life that was on the shore’; aghnam qawaalghun aftalaamakanga allumyaglluku ‘the woman butchered almost all the birds’; allumyagtaa aghvigani ‘she has done most of her washing’; eslalluk allumyagtaa ‘most of the rain is done’; cf. allute-	альюмьяхты-
allungak	pos	IPA	bottom or base part of a container	allungighaqaak akmagutak nunivalghutaalukek kiikun ‘he is putting a bottom onto the barrel shell so that he can use it next summer as a container for greens’	альюңак
allungelquq	pos	IPA	"ice pan (an early winter ice formation, circular or oval in shape, with edges too thin to support walking)"	cf. allungak; see item 1 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	альюңыльқуқ
allute-	pos	IPA	"to act, or act on (it), entirely or almost entirely"	allulluteng ‘essentially all of them’; allulluku iitek aqavzik inghumakangat ‘they picked all or almost all the salmonberries in one area’; … net allulluteng igleghlleghhiit qimugsimeng. ‘… the household or family moving together by dogteam.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 136); cf. allumyagte-	альюты-
almeghaq	pos	IPA	a kind of whale	exact identification undetermined	алмыӷақ
almesimitun	pos	IPA	the same as before	particle	алмысимитун
almesiq	pos	IPA	old custom; tradition	Chukotkan (V&E)	алмысиқ
almesiqe-	pos	IPA	to be as expected; to stay the same	almesiquq or almesiqaa ‘that's the way it is’; Almesiqeftaa nutem tawaten mesagllak. ‘It was always boggy there.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:4)	алмысиқы-
Alngighyak	pos	IPA	Algneeyak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Алңиӷьяк
alngunaghqe-	pos	IPA	to act carelessly	No information given.	алңунаҳқы-
alngunaghqute-	pos	IPA	to jumble things; to mess things up	alngunaghqusimiit nekeghqughwaaqat igat ‘they jumbled up the books that were neatly put away’; ivaghiluni saghya alngunaghqusimaa ‘he messed up everything when he was looking for something’; alngunaghqutii ulimasit ‘he messed up the tools’	алңунаҳқуты-
alngunak	pos	IPA	any way; at random; anything	"particle; Kina alngunak yuuk ateghaataquq aqfaquq piinlinghani. Nukalpigaq iingunaghmi avelghaghyaghqaanghilnguq tawavek. ‘Any man goes down when the running starts. All young men must not refrain from taking part in that.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:48); Iteghluni elngaatall pangalgaghtaamalghii alngunak tamaani teghigniqepiglluni. ’After he came in he ran all around at random enjoying himself very much.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 3); Iwernga whanga piimsi, kitum alngunak ugumiyaguskumigu yulgutni, nanqigtivigmun aglaghsaqleguuq. ‘However I say to you that whosoever hates his fellow, is liable to judgment.’ (Matthew 5:22)"	алңунак
alngunaseghagh-	pos	IPA	to act carelessly	No information given.	алңунасыӷаӷ-
alpa	pos	IPA	common murre (Uria aalge)	No information given.	альпа
alpag-	pos	IPA	"to pass through (an obstacle, physical or otherwise); to go through"	alpagtuq ‘he went through (a place or time)’; alpagaa ‘he went through it’ / alpagvigituq ‘it is impassable’	альпаг-
alqegkaq	pos	IPA	sourdock; arctic dock (Rumex arcticus)	#NAME?	альқыхкақ
alqimagh-	pos	IPA	to lick; to taste	alqimaghtuq ‘he licked something’; alqimaghaa ‘he licked it’ /	альқимаӷ-
alqimiin	pos	IPA	overhang of ice or hard snow; cornice	alqimiitet yakughnalghiit lengkekayuget ‘cornices are dangerous becuase they can tumble down’; see item 2 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	альқимӣн
alqimsug-	pos	IPA	to snack	Chukotkan (R)	альқимсуг-
alquutagh-	pos	IPA	to use a spoon	"alquutaghtuq ‘he ate something with a spoon, used a spoon’; alquutaghaa ‘he spooned it, used a spoon to eat, stir or serve it’ /"	альқӯтаӷ-
alquutaq	pos	IPA	spoon	alquutaghpak ‘stirring or serving spoon’	альқӯтақ
alukaneq	pos	IPA	low ridge on surface of snow (caused by wind); sastrugi; low obstructions in waves on surface of snow (or sand) caused by wind; wavy surface caused by drifting snow	Alukaneghqun naagllunga ikuska aqnightaqa. ‘I stumbled over a low obstruction and hurt my elbow.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 103)	алюканық
alungaghun	pos	IPA	center part of parka hood	Chukotkan (R)	алюңāӷун
alunge-	pos	IPA	to lap with the tongue; to lick	alunguq (or alungutuq) ‘he lapped something’; alungaa ‘he lapped it’ /	алюңы-
alungragh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly lap; to lick paws (of a dog)	alungraghtuq ‘it licked its paws’; alungraghaa ‘it repeatedly lapped at it’ /	алюңраӷ-
alungutelleq	pos	IPA	area in lee of building without much snow; snow bank	so called because it seems as if a hollow has been licked out there	алюңутыльық
aluq	pos	IPA	blade of oar or paddle	angwaaghutem taam alaa quupaghsimaaq ‘the blade of that paddle is cracked’; ilanga aluq kenlemikun ayemumaaq ‘the blade broke off at the crack’	алюқ
alwinanga	pos	IPA	"broad knife, similar to a scraper, on a long shaft, used for butchering whale in the water"	Chukotkan	алӱинаңа
ama1	pos	IPA	also	"particle; Aqfaqumi tamaakut sukaaghikat, paghyuneghlluget kayaalqiikayuget.  Ama tughumghatmi, iknaqelghiit tughumghallget yugiqengegkayuget. ‘In running, those who have become fast and don’t wear down easily win. Also, in wrestling, those who are strong and who are skilled wrestlers win.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:50); cf. saama"	ама1
amaa	pos	IPA	wolf (Canis lupus)	"the wolf is found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.; Amaaghllak pilaataghtuq, “Iluuq.” “Aay!” “Waamtamken, nayagitunga, avangitunga!” The big wolf said then, “Hey, pal.” “Yes?”  “ I fooled you. I don’t have a sister, I don’t have one!’ (KALLAG. 21); Takulleqiisi penniighsugnighqelluteng, taawanginaq ugighsalghiistun amaastun ayuqut. ‘They come to you trying to appear like sheep, but actually they are like fierce wolves.’ (Matthew 7.15)"	амā
amaaghaghaq	pos	IPA	baby wolf; wolf cub	No information given.	амāӷаӷақ
amaaghaq	pos	IPA	baby bird; auklet chick; person who is too young for a given situation (slang)	"litterally, ‘baby wolf’"	амāӷақ
amaamighute-	pos	IPA	to be in line with each other in someone's sight	"amaamighutuk ‘they2 are in line with each other, one directly behind the other’; cf. amagyuk, amasiiq"	амāмиӷуты-
Amagaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Амагаӷмӣ(т)
amagh-	pos	IPA	to carry on one’s shoulders	amaghtuq ‘he carried someone’ amaghaa ‘he carried him’ /	амаӷ-
amaghagh-	pos	IPA	to continue to carry on one’s shoulders	No information given.	амаӷаӷ-
amaghan	pos	IPA	rope attached to harpoon	Chukotkan (R)	амаӷан
amaghlleq	pos	IPA	overlapping slab(s) of ice along a crack in a field of sea ice	see item 3 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	амаҳльық
Amaghmelnguut	pos	IPA	site in Chukotka on Ittygran Island	see Map 3 in Appendices	амаӷмылңӯт
amaghneq	pos	IPA	seam; crack; fissure	No information given.	амаӷнық
amaghte-	pos	IPA	to criss-cross	No information given.	амаҳты-
amaghtu	pos	IPA	humpback or pink salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha)	No information given.	амаҳту
amaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to throw  down (in wrestling)	Chukotkan (V&E)	амаҳтуӷ-
amagyuk	pos	IPA	line down the middle of something; line down the back of a whale from the mid-area to the fluke	"cf. amaamighute-, amasiiq"	амагьюк
amakesegaagh-	pos	IPA	to carry piggyback	amakesegaaghtuq ‘he carried someone piggyback’; amakesegaaghaa he ‘carried her piggyback’ /	амакысыгāӷ-
amalighneq	pos	IPA	"opposite, or back, side of something "	"amalighneghani ‘on the opposite or back side of it, behind it’"	амалиӷнық
amalka	pos	IPA	for instance; for example; correctly; in the proper or traditional way	"particle; Kiyang yuga aghqesaghtughvilek naantaqluteng. Ilangi angyameng piiqluteng. Kiyang qamaglluni. Enkaam amalka ayumiqulleq kaspugtaquq. ‘Most of the people have a memorial (of the dead) ceremony somewhere. Some perform it at their boat. Most everybody does it. Then, it's like, it concludes the year.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:242)"	амалька
amalleqa	pos	IPA	also; on the other hand	"particle; Amalleqa amiirii aghvigluki yataaghqellghi piiqiit keligaghwaaghluki. ‘Also after they washed their (the birds’) skins, they prepared them, scraping them.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:106)"	амальықа
amaqe-	pos	IPA	to carry on one’s back	amaqaa ‘he carried it on his back’ / < amagh-?-	амақы-
Amaraka	pos	IPA	America	Amarakaghmii ‘an American’; also used in Chukotka 	Амарака
amaseketaagh-	pos	IPA	to carry someone on one’s back	Chukotkan (Rub.); questioned	амасыкытāӷ-
amasiiq	pos	IPA	a game played by boys who throw a stick on a line	"cf. amagyuk, amaamighute-"	амасӣқ
amawha	pos	IPA	whenever; repeatedly; every time	particle; amawha amik uumgaqa anuqem qelpeghtaa ‘whenever I close the door the wind opens it’	амахӱа
amel-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > amelkestaaghhaq, ameltu-, amellayi-, amesuwali, ameltaarak"	амыл-
amelkestaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	narrow thing	amelkestaaghhaaguq ‘it is narrow’	амылькыстāҳақ
amellayi-	pos	IPA	to become or make narrow or thin; to slim down	amellayiiq ‘he slimmed down’; amellayii ‘he made it narrow’ or ‘he slimmed down’ / kemgighyalghiimi weni amellayimaa ‘she lost some weight and became slimmer’; uunghaq amellayiluku llaaghanwha piniightaa ‘making the harpoon narrower it’s better now’	амыльяӥи-
ameltaarak	pos	IPA	rare item	Chukotkan (R)	амыльāрак
ameltu-	pos	IPA	to be wide	ameltuuq ‘it is wide’ / kiiwek ameltuuk ‘the river is wide’; ameltuqaq ‘wide thing’	амыльту-
ameltutalae	pos	IPA	width; separation between things	No information given.	амыльтуталяы
amen	pos	IPA	"then; there; but come to think of it, yes (indeed)"	"particle; Amen quyakaaguq umiilek elngaatall. Piniipigleghhiit qepghaghtet taakut iflakaayalghiit unguvaslaataghniluki. ‘Yes, the chief was very much happy. For keeping the really good workers who were lost, alive.’ (PANGEGH. 58)"	амын
amenam	pos	IPA	so then; unexpectedly	"particle; Kaviingnaquteperewaaghllak, katam maaten tugutluggnaqeghllallemtestun. Amenam maligunnaqaqsalghiinga kaviighniighmun, taawa uqengeghmetaqelghiinga. ‘It was all about trying to get foxes, like how we now try to get ivory. So then when I tagged along in trapping foxes, I would feel very satisfied.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:174)"	амынам
amennguq	pos	IPA	then it is said	particle	амынңуқ
amenqun	pos	IPA	remember; you know	"particle; Nenglutuqaq, iiggesnanighaqegkanginkut neghsameng nuyaaghqiinayukamta amenqun tepa sangwaa aliighnayukan ighlekeluugutangat. ‘There were old underground dwellings they would tell us not to dig in case we ward off the seals; as you know, their reason not to do so is that some odor might come out.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:66)"	амынқун
ameriigaghaq	pos	IPA	thin thing	"Ameriigaghallghi tamaakut qupneghqutaghqat, … ‘The thinner ones of them were used for bering cisco nets, …’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:24); Angvigapaaghrugnguq, ameriigaghaq, tagnemllaaq aghnaq. ‘She was a quite tall, thin, dark woman.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:9)"	амыпӣгаӷақ
amesugali	pos	IPA	narrow thing; slim thing	mekelghiiq taana angvigalghii amesugali kinangaawa? ‘who is that tall slender lad?’; qamislikagni amesugalingulukek ulimaniiqaak ‘he said that he’s making the sled he’s building kind of narrow’; naagu savik amesugali? ‘where is the thin knife?	амысюгали
amesuwali	pos	IPA	thin thing	naagu savik amesuwali? ‘where is the thin knife?’	амысюӱали
ametall	pos	IPA	still; yet; at least try	Chukotkan; particle	амыталь
amghuneq	pos	IPA	greedy person; grasping person	Chukotkan (R)	амӷунық
amghute-	pos	IPA	to not leave anything for others	tepaghtughnaluteng aqfasalghiimeng pinillghaneng ilangita amghusimakangit ‘they went to eat edible seashore life but the others hadn’t left any good ones’	амӷуты-
amgiwhta	pos	IPA	sled runner trimming	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, amgiwhtek, for one"	амгихӱта
amgusigh-	pos	IPA	to tie one thing to another	Chukotkan (R)	амгусиӷ-
amigh-	pos	IPA	to put skin on (a skin-boat)	aminghhaq ‘newly covered boat’	амиӷ-
amighaq	pos	IPA	skin prepared for use on the hull of a skin boat	No information given.	амиӷақ
amighqaq	pos	IPA	skin prepared for use on the hull of a skin boat	No information given.	амиҳқақ
amighqwaaq	pos	IPA	bird skin	No information given.	амиҳқӱāқ
amighregaq	pos	IPA	skin on body	No information given.	амиӷрыгақ
amightu	pos	IPA	burbot (Lota lota)	No information given.	амиҳту
Amigtuughet	pos	IPA	a particular clan	singular is Amigtuuq	Амихтӯӷыт
amiigigh-	pos	IPA	to fence off; to block	No information given.	амӣгиӷ-
amiin	pos	IPA	ice formation extending from sea ice over the shore to which it is frozen; ice that stretches from a floating or fast iceberg	see item 4 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	амӣн
amiiqaq	pos	IPA	whole walrus skin	"Inwa salegnun, atungalegnun, amiiqalegnun, unaghsilegnun tunqughaqegkangit. ‘Not to mention trading with people having  things like skin for covering boats, whole walrus skins, and wood.’ (PANGEGH. 60)"	амӣқақ
amiiraq	pos	IPA	sealskin; pelt; skin	No information given.	амӣрақ
amiiwraq	pos	IPA	"doorpost (especially of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.))"	Chukotkan (R)	амӣӱрақ
amik	pos	IPA	door; doorway	No information given.	амик
amikluk	pos	IPA	weasel; ermine (Mustela spp.)	cf. amiq; he weasel is found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.	амикльюк
aminakuq	pos	IPA	open water left in newly formed sea ice fields due to gaps between the floes that join to form the fields; small patch of open water in heavy ice or the ice that surrounds open water	see item 5 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	аминакуқ
aminakwaaq	pos	IPA	leftover	cf. aminaqe-	аминакӱāқ
aminaqe-	pos	IPA	to leave some for someone	aminaqaa ‘he left some of it for someone’ / cf. aminakwaaq	аминақы-
aminghaq	pos	IPA	trimming from skin covering of boat	No information given.	аминӷақ
amiq	pos	IPA	skin (especially of an animal)	No information given.	амиқ
amiqlaq	pos	IPA	bat 	Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined	амиқльяқ
amisiiq	pos	IPA	"a game in which a village is divided into two teams, each trying to outrun the other around the village"	Chukotkan (R)	амисӣқ
amitelqak	pos	IPA	sewn-up hole in skin hull of boat	a dual	амитыльқак
amitelqaq	pos	IPA	thin bone in forearm; radius; longitudinal stringer or batten of skin boat	No information given.	амитыльқақ
amiwaaq	pos	IPA	threshold	yuuk amiwaaghmeng amllughluni aanuq ‘a man stepped over the threshold and went outside’	амиӱāқ
amlae	pos	IPA	crotch and upper leg area	often dual for one: amlegka ‘my crotch’	амляы
Amliqak	pos	IPA	narrows at VABM “Knife” near center of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Амлиқак
amllaghwaaq	pos	IPA	a certain thin seaweed; a certain trout-like fish	exact identification undetermined and questioned	амльяӷӱāқ
amlleqngiitigh-	pos	IPA	to squeeze something between one’s knees	Chukotkan (R)	амльықңӣтиӷ-
amllugh- 	pos	IPA	to take a step (over)	amllughtuq ‘he took a step’; amllughaa ‘he stepped over it’ /	амльюӷ-
amlluqiiraq	pos	IPA	vegetables of any kind; greens; in particular heart-leafed saxifrage (Saxifraga punctata or Saxifraga nelsoniana)	No information given.	амльюқӣрақ
amqeghpagte-	pos	IPA	for ground to freeze	"literally, ‘to suddenly bite’; amqeghpagtegpenani qaasghuunnaghnayaqanga ‘I wish it would freeze so sled runners could go over the frozen surface’"	амқыҳпахты-
amqeghqugh-	pos	IPA	to bite repeatedly	No information given.	амқыҳқуӷ-
amqeghte-	pos	IPA	to bite	amqeghtaa ‘he bit it’ /	амқыҳты-
amqeghutek	pos	IPA	vise	No information given.	амқыӷутык
amqegkagh-	pos	IPA	to nip	No information given.	амқыхкаӷ-
amqute-	pos	IPA	to take a bite of something	amqutuq ‘he took a bite’; amqutaa ‘he took a bite for her ‘/	амқуты-
amsa-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > amsakaghtaq, amsanaq, amsanagh-, amsakelghii, amsakeneq"	амся-
amsakaghtaq	pos	IPA	small animal or person	"Atungagmeng aangelghiimeng, amsakaghtameng iwhanimeng nateghqaqegkayuguyaghpetut. ‘The material for skin-boot soles was the skin of the bearded seal, large ones and, you know, those small ones.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:98); = amsakeghtaq; cf. amsakelghii, amsakeneq"	амсякаҳтақ
amsakeghtaq	pos	IPA	small animal or person	"= amsakaghtaq; cf. amsakelghii, amsakeneq"	амсякыҳтақ
amsakelghii	pos	IPA	small animal or person	"Elngaatall akilpegaaq … kaviiq, inwa kalngagaq amsakleghii, amenqun aangeghllalghiit maakut. ‘There was a lot of trading going on … for fox; a small sack [to hold them] wasn’t used but rather those large ones.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:144); Aangelghiitlu, amsakelghiitlu aghveghet iqallugsagnitut. ‘Big ones and small ones, whales are somewhat like fish.’ (AANGHHAQ 64); cf. amsakeneq, amsakaghtaq"	амсякылӷӣ
amsakelleq	pos	IPA	smaller one; smallest one	"used (only?) with possessed endings; Kayagtaqegkanginkut amsakellghinaaneng, nuugtunghani. ‘He urged us [only to shoot] the very smallest ones as being easiest to pull.’ cf. amsakeneq, amsakelghii"	амсякыльық
amsakeneq	pos	IPA	smaller one; smallest one	"used (only?) with possessed endings; Taagken yugem pimakanga, “Una amsakenghat qaaknaqaqa Honda-gpenun qayughllak Honda-gken mekestaghhaak.” ‘Then the man said to me, “I’m going to put the smallest one of them on your Honda because your Honda is small.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 38); cf. amsakelleq"	амсякынық
amsanagh-	pos	IPA	to be calm (weather)	No information given.	амсянаӷ-
amsanaghlluk	pos	IPA	calm day	amsanaghlluuguq ‘it is a calm day’	амсянаҳльюк
amsanaq	pos	IPA	calm day	No information given.	амсянақ
amsighqe-	pos	IPA	to mend by sewing	amsighqaa ‘he mended it’ / amsighqiiq ‘he mended something’; amsighquughtuq ‘he keeps mending things’; = emsighqe-	амсиҳқы-
amsikagh-	pos	IPA	undressed; naked	postural root; amsikaghtuq ‘he undressed’; amsikaghtaa ‘he undressed him’; amsikaghngaaq ‘he is naked’; amsikaghmi aanuq ‘he went outside naked’	амсикаӷ-
amsungisaq	pos	IPA	minke whale (Balaenoptera acutorostrata)	Chukotkan	амсюңисяқ
amu-	pos	IPA	"to pull through an opening (of thread, rope, etc.)"	amaa ‘he pulled it through’ / amugu ‘pull it!’; amuughaa ‘he kept pulling it’	аму-
amug-	pos	IPA	to be unable to see	amugaa ‘he couldn't see it ‘/	амуг-
amugite-	pos	IPA	to have good eyesight	No information given.	амугиты-
amugnagh-	pos	IPA	to inhibit sight	No information given.	амугнаӷ-
amugtagh-	pos	IPA	to have trouble seeing	amugtaghtuq ‘he has eye trouble (temporarily or permanently)’	амухтаӷ-
amutughqe-	pos	IPA	to sew quickly	No information given.	амутуҳқы-
amuugte-	pos	IPA	to lose one's sight	No information given.	амӯхты-
amwiiwhta	pos	IPA	shoe of sled runner	No information given.	амӱӣхӱта
amyak	pos	IPA	mussel	No information given.	амьяк
Amyak	pos	IPA	"site in Chukotka, on Ittygran Island"	see Map 3 in Appendices	Амьяк
amyengenghaq	pos	IPA	small mussel shell	No information given.	амӥыңынӷақ
amyugh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > amyughaagh-, amyulqe-, amyuqetagh, amyuutke-"	амьюӷ-
amyughaagh-	pos	IPA	to tease (between cousins)	amyughaaghaa ‘he teased her’ / amyughaaghtuq or amyughaaghiiq ‘he is teasing someone’	амьюӷāӷ-
amyulqe-	pos	IPA	to make fun of someone	Chukotkan (R); ellngan amyulqumaa ilani ‘he made fun of his partner’	амьюльқы-
amyume-	pos	IPA	to waste or squander	Chukotkan (R)	амьюмы-
amyuqetagh-	pos	IPA	to be cruel	amyuqetaghtuq ‘he is cruel’	амьюқытаӷ-
amyuqetaghta 	pos	IPA	persecuter; tormenter	"amyuqetaghtengi ‘his persecuters, tormenters’"	амьюқытаҳта
amyuqetaq	pos	IPA	cruel person	No information given.	амьюқытақ
amyuutke-	pos	IPA	to be cruel to (him) or over (it)	No information given.	амью̄ткы-
an'gaghaq	pos	IPA	woman's brother's child; niece of a woman through her brother; nephew of a woman through her brother	No information given.	ангаӷақ
an'gaghigh-	pos	IPA	to give gift to newborn baby	perhaps particularly or originally by a woman to her brother's child; cf. an’gaghaq	ангаӷиӷ-
an'gigh-	pos	IPA	to go or be outside to get fresh air	"generally said of a child going out for fresh air or to play; an'gightuq ‘he went outside’ / an'giitaa ‘he went outside with her (a child, generally)’; Upenghami puqlaghhneghani an’giq teghignapiglleghhii. ‘In the springtime when it gets warmer being outdoors is fun.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 25)"	ангиӷ-
an'giqragh-	pos	IPA	to be outside for no real reason	No information given.	ангиқшаӷ-
anaana 	pos	IPA	maternal aunt; mother's sister	cf. naa	анāна
anaavag-	pos	IPA	to use a net on a pole to catch birds	No information given.	анāваг-
anaavak 	pos	IPA	net on a pole used for catching birds; basket net for catching birds	like a dipnet	анāвак
anag-	pos	IPA	to flee; to escape	anagtuq ‘he escaped’ / yuuk piyaa anagtuq sikuk iiksayek esnameng ‘the man who was hunting on the ice fled to safety when the shore ice loosened and floated away’; qamaglluteng yugi taam kumaqam mangtegham anagtuusimalghiit ‘every one of the occupants of that house that burned escaped’	анаг-
anaggute-	pos	IPA	to be mixed up; to be confused; to do things wrong	"anaggutuq ‘he is mixed up, doing things all wrong’"	анахуты-
anagh- 	pos	IPA	to defecate; to rust	anaghtuq ‘he defecated’ or ‘it rusted’; anaghaa ‘he defecated on it’ or ‘it rusted’ /	анаӷ-
anaghiitaq	pos	IPA	crosspiece at front of sled	No information given.	анаӷӣтақ
anaghllengiiq	pos	IPA	blue fly	No information given.	анаҳльыңӣқ
anaghnigh-	pos	IPA	to stink; to smell spoiled	No information given.	анаӷниӷ-
anaghtaa-	pos	IPA	to rust	"anaghtaaguq or anaghtaagaa ‘it rusted’ / anaghtaakaq ‘rusted thing’; Iwernga elpesineng katam qilagmi kagpagitek aklungingimeng qayughllak moth-ngituq, anaghtaangituq naafqiiyaghqameng, tegleghniightengituqlu naafqiiluteng teglegughyaghqameng. ‘However store up for yourself treasures in heaven because there are no moths, nor rust to destroy them, nor theives to break in and steal them.’ (Matthew 6.20)"	анаҳтā-
anagnga-	pos	IPA	to be incorrect; to be wrong; to be provoked	"anagngaaq ‘it is incorrect’, ‘he is provoked’/"	анагңа-
anagniigh-	pos	IPA	to be in the act of fleeing or escaping; to be on the run	taghnughhaq anagniightuq qilullghiimeng qikmimeng ‘the child is fleeing from the barking dog’; yuuk teglekaq taawa anagniighaquq ‘the man who stole is on the run’	анагнӣӷ-
anagniighusiq	pos	IPA	shaman’s song for protection and safety	Chukotkan (R)	апагнӣӷусиқ
"anagrin, anagritaq"	pos	IPA	harness strap for reindeer	Chukotkan (R)	"анагрин, анагритақ"
anagte-	pos	IPA	to miss the mark; to confuse (get one confused); to irritate (a person)	"anagtaa ‘he missed it (shooting)’ or ‘he confused her’ / taghnughhaghmi umyugakek anagsimakek ‘he made his child confused’, ‘he irritated his child’; anagtaa espalakani ‘he misspelled the word he was spelling’; elngaatall yugem anagtaanga ‘the man really irritated me’"	анахты-
anagtii-	pos	IPA	to miss the target; to commit an error; to do wrong; to break the law	"anagtiiguq ‘he missed the target, committed an error, did wrong, broke the law’ / anagtiivikaa ‘he hit something other than what one has aimed at’; anagtiiviklukek qirgesek sigiqughaak ‘he hit the window unintentionally and broke it’; Whanga guullaataquunga, estamaneng unangunga. Anagtiinghitunga. ‘I shot accurately, caught four. I didn’t miss any.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 51)"	анахтӣ-
anagu-	pos	IPA	to strike with a stick	"anawaa ‘he struck it’ / anagutaq ‘stick used for striking or beating something’; Puughtilghiit tamaakut angwaaghutmeng anawaaqluki! ‘Those who are pretending [to work], hit them with the paddle!’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:156)"	анагу-
anagutaq	pos	IPA	stick used for striking or beating something	No information given.	анагутақ
anagyaq	pos	IPA	person who seems fated always to escape from dangerous situations; born survivor	yuggaq taana elngaatall anagyaaguq ‘that little fellow is the sort that always survives’	анагьяқ
analghu 	pos	IPA	large ice floe; piled ice or pressure ridge higher than surroundings	see item 6 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004 Oozeva et al. 2004; analghwaaghet ‘small pile of ice’	аналӷу
anangugh-	pos	IPA	to escape (especially from hardship)	saghligam qikmighani anangughtii uksuum sapeghnaaneng ‘the mother dog helped her puppies escape the harshness of the winter’	анаңуӷ-
anaq 	pos	IPA	feces; excrement; rust	aniighaa ‘he removed the feces or rust from it’	анақ
anaqeltaghaq	pos	IPA	lead shot	Chukotkan; = anaqeltaq	анақыльтаӷақ
anaqeltaq	pos	IPA	lead shot	#NAME?	анақыльтақ
anate-	pos	IPA	to raise; to nurture	anataa ‘he raised and nurtured him’/ saghligaq aqlaghaghllagmi anatikaq avaqutamineng ‘the female dog nurtured her puppies even though it was very cold’; teghikusam avaqutateng naten anataqatki? ‘how do wild animals nurture their young?’	анаты-
ane-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > aane-, anekestagh-, an’gigh-, aningugh-, aninghwaaq"	аны-
aneghneghiite-	pos	IPA	to get out of breath	aneghneghiituq ‘he got out of breath’ / aneghneghiitqaghtunga aqfalighaataghlunga ‘I got out of breath when I ran around’	аныӷныӷӣты-
aneghneghte-	pos	IPA	to do something that turns out well; to choose well	aneghneghtuq ‘he did something that turned out well’; aneghneghtaa he ‘chose it well’ / cf. anighta	аныӷныҳты-
aneghneq1	pos	IPA	breath	No information given.	аныӷнық1
aneghneq2	pos	IPA	the way things are	No information given.	аныӷнық2
aneghrengi-	pos	IPA	to be extremely pleased with a new possession or other thing just obtained	aneghrengiiq ‘he’s pleased with something’ / aneghrengitkaa ‘he’s pleased with it’; Aneghrengighllak elqiighneng. ‘She was thrilled with her visors.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:214); Elngaatall aneghrengitkemmeng tuguluku niivusghaminun kanaghtaa. ‘From being delighted with it she took it and put into her main berry container.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:244)	аныӷрыңи-
aneghte-1	pos	IPA	to breathe	aneghtuq ‘he breathed’; aneghtaa ‘he breathed on it’ / cf. aneghte-2 (perhaps ultimately the same morpheme)	аныҳты-1
aneghte-2	pos	IPA	to continue to be or to function as one has; to repeat one’s actions	"aneghtuq ‘it continued’ / Sikiggaq neghellemta neqekragem kagimleghwaaghaneng neghluni riigtemun aglaghluni iteghluni aaneghmini tagiiqluni, tawaten aneghlleghhiinguq esghapagaat. ‘The squirrel was eating bread crumbs where we had eaten earlier, went into her den, came out, and we watched her repeating her actions for some time.’ (KALLAG. 98); cf. aneghte-1 (perhaps ultimately the same morpheme)"	аныҳты-2
aneghziig-	pos	IPA	"to exhale softly, slowly and deeply"	"yughaghtem aapghaa Kiyaghneghemnguq yuuk ulimayuggaaghyamigu aneghziigluku qengagkenkun unguvaghtestekaqeftaa ‘the preacher tells us that God had breathed into the nostrils of the first man when he created him, and made him alive’"	аныӷзӣг-
anekestagh-	pos	IPA	to crawl out quietly to the open space 	Chukotkan (R) 	аныкыстаӷ-
anengaq	pos	IPA	older brother (specifically of male)	strictly speaking this is the older brother of a male while the older brother of a female is kugeq	аныңақ
aneq	pos	IPA	ember	No information given.	анық
aneraaghinaq	pos	IPA	putrifying thing	Chukotkan (R)	анырāӷинақ
ang	pos	IPA	"here, take it"	particle; said when handing something to someone	аң
Angaayu	pos	IPA	Oongayuk Hill on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Аңāю
angaghqe-	pos	IPA	to convey; to take along; to transport	angaghquq ‘he took something along’ /	аңаҳқы-
angaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to keep on transporting things	angaghqughtuq ‘he keeps on transporting things’; angaghqughii ‘he keeps on transporting them’ /	аңаҳқуӷ-
angaghquusiq	pos	IPA	conveyance	No information given.	аңаҳқӯсиқ
angak	pos	IPA	maternal uncle; mother's brother	No information given.	аңак
angalke-	pos	IPA	to jerk on a tether or other restraint to get free	"of animals or small children mainly; angalkuq ‘it jerked at the tether, one holding it, etc.’ / taghnughhaq naaminun angalkuq ‘the child jerked at its mother’"	аңалькы-
angalqaaq	pos	IPA	game of some sort	exact details undetermined	аңальқāқ
angalqataasiq	pos	IPA	hook for retrieving seals or birds; sling for hunting	"may be used in the plural, angalqataasit, for a single complete device"	аңальқатāсиқ
angalqatagh-	pos	IPA	to hook a caught seal to retrieve	unangkaqa angalqataghluku tugaaqa ‘with a seal hook I retrieved the seal that I had shot’	аңальқатаӷ-
angalqataq1	pos	IPA	white wagtail (Motacilla alba)	No information given.	аңальқатақ1
angalqataq2	pos	IPA	hook for retrieving seals or birds; sling for hunting	"may be used in the plural, angalqataq, for a single complete device; ‘sling’ meaning questioned; the device is pear-shaped, made of wood, approximately 1-1/2 feet long, 1/2 foot in diameter, and has several barbless hooks protruding from the sides; angalqatat tagivaghten aagayupigtut ‘the seal retrieving hook you gave me goes far when thrown’"	аңальқатақ2
anganga	pos	IPA	ouch!	child's expression when hurt	аңаңа
angangarquq	pos	IPA	ankle bone	#NAME?	аңаңашқуқ
angatugh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > angatughqe-, angatumeng"	аңатуӷ-
angatughqe-	pos	IPA	to hurry over (it) (especially at sewing)	angatughqaa (or angatughqutkaa) ‘she hurried over it’ / angatughqumakek aghnam kaamgek angyaghvagilgan ugini the woman ‘hurriedly sewed her husband's skin boots before he went out hunting’	аңатуҳқы-
angatumeng	pos	IPA	for a long time yet; without delay	particle; angatumeng kaannaanghituq usiista ‘the supply ship won't be here for a long time yet’; angatumeng pinghitem estugaq umegtuq ‘because of not acting without delay (i.e. because of (our) delay) the store  closed (before we could go there)’	аңатумың
angayuqaghqaq	pos	IPA	"step, foster or adoptive parent"	No information given.	аңаюқаҳқақ
angayuqaq	pos	IPA	parent; boss	No information given.	аңаюқақ
angayuqiilnguq*	pos	IPA	orphan	No information given.	аңаюқӣлңуқ
ange-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root;  > aange-, angeneq, angeyeghaq, angli-, angkaliigh-, anglegun, angtala, angtaaq, angtughhaq, angtughpak, angvigagh-"	аңы-
angegh-	pos	IPA	"to affirm; to assent; to agree; to say ""yes"""	"angeghtuq ‘he said ""yes""’; aangghaa ‘he said ""yes"" to her’ / aangghutaa ‘he said ""yes"" about it or for her’; aangghutuk ‘they2 agreed with each other’; Aapsamkun angeghtuq. ‘When I asked him, he said “yes”.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 27)"	аңыӷ-
angeghpayug-	pos	IPA	"to perk up; to feel revived, strengthened and encouraged"	angeghpayugtuq ‘he perked up’; angeghpayugtukut nagaqughluta aangqaghteput kayaalqiimaniluki ‘we perked up hearing that our ball players had won’; angeghpayugnapigtuq pinitun pinghata ‘it perks one up when they do well’; taaghtam pinighningatni angeghpayugtuq ‘he perked up when the doctor told him he was okay’	аңыҳпаюг-
angeghqe-	pos	IPA	to agree upon; to approve of	No information given.	аңыҳқы-
angeghquusiq	pos	IPA	means of transportation; stretcher	Chukotkan (R)	аңыҳқӯсиқ
angeghrugneq	pos	IPA	determined person; persistent person	"angeghrugneghuuq ‘he is a determined, persistent person’; angeghrugneghutminek qenwat ullghitagni naallukek tugaak ‘being a determined person he paid for his snow-machine and took it’"	аңыӷругнық
angeghrugte-	pos	IPA	to be a determined person	aneghrugtuq ‘he is a determined person’	аңыӷрухты-
"angeneq, aangeneq"	pos	IPA	bigger one; larger one	angengha or aangengha ‘the one larger than it’; angenghat or aangenghat ‘the largest one of them’	"аңынық, āңынық"
Angetequq	pos	IPA	former village west of Cape Stoletia in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Аңытықуқ
angeyaghaq	pos	IPA	orphan bull walrus	No information given.	аңыяӷақ
angeyeghaq	pos	IPA	rogue walrus that eats other walruses and seals	said to be a walrus that had been orphaned when young	аңыӥыӷақ
angghuraq	pos	IPA	noose made from rope	Chukotkan (R)	аңӷурақ
anghungite-	pos	IPA	to eat greedily; to gobble food; to use things up fast	Ilangi yugem neghluteng anghungitut. ‘Some people eat very fast.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 25)	анӷуңиты-
angi-	pos	IPA	to come undone; to unravel; to come unfastened	"angiiq ‘it came undone’ / aghnaghaghhaam taqughtekek angiik ‘the little girl's braids came undone’; angituq ‘it came loose, came undone’; angitaa ‘he undid it’"	аңи-
angighhe-	pos	IPA	to smear; to rub in; to spread; to paint	"angighhuq ‘he spread something onto something or onto himself, he applied lotion’; angighhaa ‘he spread something onto it’ / angighhegkaq ‘something that has been painted or has had something spread on it’; Angyaghput kineghnaghsimaluku angighhnaqaqa. ‘I’m going to paint our boat while it’s favorable for things to dry.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 27)"	аңиҳы-
angighhwaagh-	pos	IPA	"to spread (paint, ointment, etc.) especially repeatedly over a small area"	angighhwaaghaaa ‘he applied something to it over and over again’; qezigni angighhwaaghaqeftaak lipstick-meng ‘she applied lipstick to her lips’; aghangi angighhwaaghutkayuguftut ‘her medication has to be rubbed in’	аңиҳӱāӷ-
angighte-	pos	IPA	to become warm	Chukotkan	аңиҳты-
angiite-	pos	IPA	to arrive on time; to finish on time	angiituq ‘he finished or arrived on time’; angiitaa ‘he finished it on time’ / tengegkayugnun aangiituq ‘he arrived in time to catch the plane’; angiitaak atkuyaaghegni ‘she finished her dress on time’	аңӣты-
"angilaagh-, angitaagh-"	pos	IPA	for water to be calm in a cover	No information given.	"аңилāӷ-, аңитāӷ-"
angiqe-	pos	IPA	to undo; to untie; to unravel	angiqaa ‘he undid it’ /	аңиқы-
angka-	pos	IPA	to be a certain size	"… galvanize-et sangwaat egllukaghqaghllaget entaqun whaten plywood-estun angkalghiit. ‘… sheets of galvanized metal for stoves the size of sheets of plywood.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:70); Aghsaghmesaghtuuq forty-five-cents-an-hour, iwernga tawaten angkayaghtuq. ‘It wasn’t much, 45 cents an hour [the pay], however that’s how much it was.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:82); Tawaten angkaniluku aapqaat. ‘They say it was that size.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:2)"	аңка-
angkaliigh-	pos	IPA	to become the size of something	Aghnalqwaaghhaq qenwat iiggestun angkaliightuq. ‘Then the little old lady became the size of a hand.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 38)	аңкалӣӷ-
anglaaq	pos	IPA	hole made for ice-fishing	No information given.	аңля̄қ
anglaminagh-	pos	IPA	to be beautiful or colorful	"for example, the tundra in spring"	аңламинаӷ-
anglanagh-	pos	IPA	to be beautiful (of sounds); to be delightful to hear	qawaagem ulunga anglanaghtuq ‘the song of the bird is beautiful’	аңлянаӷ-
anglaq	pos	IPA	wish; desire	anglagka waran palaghtikek ‘at least temporarily grant my wish’	аңляқ
"anglegun, angleguta"	pos	IPA	sibling	No information given.	"аңлыгун, анлыгута"
anglegutkaghqaq	pos	IPA	step-sibling; half-sibling	No information given.	аңлыгуткаҳқақ
angli-1	pos	IPA	to grow; to become big	angliiq ‘he or it grew’ / anglingllaghaa ‘he raised it or her’; Ighneqa angliiq elngaatall ayumiqulleghmi ukani. ‘My son is growing so much this year.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 27); Yuuk taana anglistaat igaghtemeng kaangqumun. ‘That are promoting that man from teacher to principal.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 28)	аңли-1
angli-2	pos	IPA	to make a hole in the ice	No information given.	аңли-2
anglii-	pos	IPA	to make a hole for ice-fishing	No information given.	аңлӣ-
anglime-	pos	IPA	to be spectacular; to be resounding	Chukotkan (V&E); questioned	аңлимы-
anglinaasiq	pos	IPA	a certain of kind of edible plant	Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined	аңлинāсиқ
anglinasug-	pos	IPA	to grow slowly	No information given.	аңлинасюг-
anglinghhaq	pos	IPA	young man or woman	No information given.	аңлинҳақ
anglisaalgun	pos	IPA	agemate; contemporary; peer; one with whom one has grown up	anglisaalgutkullghiit qerngaghmeng igaataqut ‘the who are of the same age go to school together’; anglisaalgutkullghiik angelgutkullghiistun kiyaghtuk ‘the two who grew up together are like siblings’	аңлися̄лгун
anglisaghaq	pos	IPA	stepchild; adopted child; foster-child	No information given.	аңлисяӷақ
anglisaghta	pos	IPA	step-parent; adoptive parent; foster parent; father who raises child without the mother	No information given.	аңлисяҳта
anglivik	pos	IPA	motherland	Chukotkan (R)	аңливик
anglu	pos	IPA	seal breathing hole in ice	No information given.	аңлю
angmeghaq	pos	IPA	whale type	exact identification undetermined	аңмыӷақ
angqa	pos	IPA	hip; thigh; person from a house located to the side (of this one or of ours)	Chukotkan (R)	аңқа
angqapegtaq	pos	IPA	spherical rock	No information given.	аңқапыхтақ
angqaperuk	pos	IPA	round thing; circle; sphere	Nuna una angqaperukegtaq aangqastun. ‘This earth is round like a ball.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 125)	аңқапырук
angqaq1	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > aangqagh-, aangqaq, aangqanneq, aangqasiigh-, angqaperuk, angqighaq"	аңқақ1
angqaq2	pos	IPA	height; size	Chukotkan (R); < ange-qaq (?)	аңқақ2
angqigh-	pos	IPA	to be in pain	#NAME?	аңқиӷ-
angqighaq	pos	IPA	game played with a ball	No information given.	аңқиӷақ
angtaaq	pos	IPA	mature bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)	No information given.	аңтāқ
angtalae	pos	IPA	size	angtalnga or angtalanga ‘its size’	аңталяы
angtalgun	pos	IPA	person of the same age; agemate	Chukotkan (R)	аңталгун
angtaliite-	pos	IPA	to grow to full size	No information given.	аңталӣты-
angtughhaq	pos	IPA	grey whale (Eschrichtius robustus)	No information given.	аңтуҳақ
angtughpak	pos	IPA	bull walrus	No information given.	аңтуҳпак
angtughte-	pos	IPA	to catch something (game) that is big	angtughtaa ‘he caught it (something big)’ / kaviiq angtughsimakanga naaptani ‘he caught a big fox in his snare’; kayutani angtughsimakangi ‘he caught a big fish’	аңтуҳты-
angu-	pos	IPA	to overtake; to catch up with	angwaa ‘he caught up with it ‘/ angwaaqaa ‘he is catching up with it’ or ‘he regularly catches up with it’	аңу-
angufqaghte-	pos	IPA	to be stormbound; to be weathered in	angufqaghtaa ‘he got weathered in’; Sivungaghtaayalghiit angufqaghlluki Tapghukun tamlagumalghiit ‘they were going to Savoonga but got stormbound and went ashore at Tapghuq’; uksaaghmi imaghllugtughhneghmini angufqaghtaghnaghtaqaa ‘in fall it is common to get stormbound when traveling on the rough sea’	аңуфқаҳты-
angukaq	pos	IPA	dwarf fireweed; river beauty (plant) (Epilobium latifolium (or Chamaenerion latifolium))	"eaten raw alone or with blubber and meat, or put into barrels to ferment along with other greens"	аңукақ
anguksag-	pos	IPA	to get caught in a storm while traveling; to deal with mischievous people; to encounter unexpectedly; to be at a place or time while something is still there	anguksagaa ‘he encountered him unexpectedly’ / uughqanun piit angyat anguksagumayaqangi eslam iwernga kaasimaniit ‘those who were going to the south side of the island got caught in the storm but managed to arrive’; nelliqelghiit anguksagluki tugulaamakangit ‘they dealt those who were being mischeivous and took them’; eslam seghleghem anguksagii ‘bad weather caught up with them’; ighaghviluk anguksakaqaq naafqestegpenaan ‘I was at the old school before they tore it down’	аңуксяг-
angulegh-	pos	IPA	for waves to overtake one	angulghaa ‘it (the wave) overtook him’ / Esnighqwaghlunga angulghaanga. ‘The waves reached me while I was beachcombing.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 28)	аңулыӷ-
angulgha-	pos	IPA	"to move slow (of liquid, especially the tide)"	No information given.	аңулӷа-
angumaaghwagh-	pos	IPA	to linger in one’s poor condition without improvement; to continue as is (of person or condition)	tawatelluni angumaaghwaghtuq ‘he stayed in the same condition’; paninang imaghlliilqa angumaaghwaghaquq ‘I still feel uneasy from my trip where there was a lot of motion’; qinuyuwaaq paninang angumaaghwam entaqun ‘he is still not feeling well from being sick’	аңумāӷӱаӷ-
angumaasitaagh-	pos	IPA	"to search for something lost; to put effort in order to take, gather, eat, etc. more than others"	No information given.	аңумāситāӷ-
angumaaskitaagh-	pos	IPA	to hurry in order to not miss something or to finished in time	angyaalgutkaghaat angumaaskitaaghteki igleghalgukaghaat ‘hurry up and get ready so we can go hunting with the other boat that is going’	аңумāскитāӷ-
angumaasqitaghte-	pos	IPA	to be delayed	No information given.	аңумāсқитаҳты-
angumake-	pos	IPA	to catch up with a person; to get to an event before it is over	"aghulaqnaqelghii angumakaa ‘he got there before she left, caught up with the one about to leave’; angumakenghitaa ‘he missed it/her’"	аӷумакы-
angumatkenghite-	pos	IPA	to miss (as by not getting somewhere in time for something)	tuyughivigkaqa angumakenghitaqa aghulaqumalghii  ‘I missed the onewith whom I was going to send a package since he’d already gone’; nunmaagmetutmineng angumakumangisimakangi angyaghnaqet ‘he is so slow in getting ready that the boat that he had been going to go hunting with had already gone’	аңуматкынӷиты-
anguneq	pos	IPA	inner and outer stitches on skin boat	Chukotkan (R)	аңунық
Angutughvik	pos	IPA	July	"said to mean literally, ‘time of plant gathering’ (perhaps from angukaq (q.v.)); also given in various sources as June and August"	Аңутуӷвик
anguugh-	pos	IPA	to be stormbound; to be delayed by unforeseen circumstances	anguughtuq or anguughaa ‘he is stormbound or otherwise delayed’ /	аңӯӷ-
anguyak	pos	IPA	enemy	anguyaga aghulaqumaaq ‘his enemy left’; mekelghiiq taana anguyakaa ‘that boy is her enemy’	аңуяк
anguyiqe-	pos	IPA	to pick a fight	anguyiquq ‘he picked a fight’ / anguyiqutkaa ‘he picked a fight over it’	аңуӥиқы-
angvagneq	pos	IPA	spoiled person; overprotected person; one who feels sorry for himself	No information given.	аңвагнық
angvagte-	pos	IPA	to overreact to discomfort or pain; to act spoiled; to feel sorry for oneself and show it 	"Mekelghiighhaq ggutangighluni angvagtaquq. ‘After he lost a tooth, the boy made a fuss.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 28)"	аңвахты-
angvalluqegtaq	pos	IPA	oval thing; big thing	uyghaghmeng angvalluqegtameng saghnamaanga ‘I picked up a large oval rock’	аңвальюқыхтақ
angvaneq	pos	IPA	hollow behind or under shoulder blade and above collar bone	No information given.	аңванық
angvigagh-	pos	IPA	to be tall (of a person); to be taller	angvigaghtuq ‘he is tall’ / angvigapigtuq ‘he is very tall’; angvigaghtuq whangamneng ‘he is taller than me’	аңвигаӷ-
angwaagh-	pos	IPA	to paddle	angwaaghtuq ‘he is paddling’ /	аңӱāӷ-
angwaaghta	pos	IPA	paddler	No information given.	аңӱāҳта
angwaaghun	pos	IPA	paddle	No information given.	аңӱāӷун
angyaataghqe-	pos	IPA	to eat boating food	No information given.	аңья̄таҳқы-
angyaataq	pos	IPA	food for use on boat trip; provisions	Estugaghmeng angyaataghqangunga. ‘I got some food for the trip from the store.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 29); angyaatat puyguyaqunaki ‘don’t forget the food for the journey’	аңья̄тақ
angyagh-	pos	IPA	to use a boat; to travel by boat; to hunt with a boat	No information given.	аңьяӷ-
angyaghllug-	pos	IPA	to use an ice floe as a makeshift raft to cross open water	angyaghllugtuq ‘he crossed with a makeshift icefloe raft’	аңьяҳльюг-
angyaghnak	pos	IPA	very big boat	No information given.	аңьяӷнак
angyaghnaq	pos	IPA	for there to be good weather for hunting by boat	No information given.	аңьяӷнақ
angyaghniigh-	pos	IPA	to hunt with a boat; to ask for a boat	Angyaghniiq taaqenghani qeghaqaq uglapigtaqelghii. ‘When the season for hunting by boat is over there’s lots of work to be done.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 29)	аңьяӷнӣӷ-
angyaghpak	pos	IPA	ship	No information given.	аңьяҳпак
angyaghqaq	pos	IPA	boat building material	No information given.	аңьяҳқақ
angyaghugh-	pos	IPA	to take an unplanned boat trip or side-trip	No information given.	аңьяӷуӷ-
angyaghut	pos	IPA	more than one boat	"this is a plural;  apparently used when plural. angyat, could be taken as indicating a single boat and crew; Agigutenkut taakut angyat Guwiingenkut angyaghut. ‘There were boats with crews Agigun’s and Guwiinga, more than one boat.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:62) "	аңьяӷут
angyaghvigllak	pos	IPA	the time of the great legendary flood	No information given.	аңьяӷвихльяк
angyaghwaaq	pos	IPA	old-time wooden whaling boat	No information given.	аңьяӷӱāқ
angyalegtaq	pos	IPA	boat owner; boat captain	No information given.	аңьялыхтақ
angyalek	pos	IPA	boat owner; captain	No information given.	аңьялык
angyallek	pos	IPA	good boatsman	No information given.	аңьяльык
angyalligh-	pos	IPA	to steer a boat	angyallightuq ‘he's steering’ /	аңьяльиӷ-
angyallighta	pos	IPA	captain	No information given.	аңьяльиҳта
angyalliq	pos	IPA	back of boat where captain sits	No information given.	аңьяльиқ
angyangestaq	pos	IPA	small boat used for hunting birds	#NAME?	аңьяңыстақ
angyapik	pos	IPA	traditional skin boat	No information given.	аңьяпик
angyaq	pos	IPA	"boat, especially, open skin boat"	No information given.	аңьяқ
Angyat	pos	IPA	Vngyat Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Аңьят
angyavak	pos	IPA	large boat	Chukotkan (R)	аңьявак
angyeghetaq	pos	IPA	food for use on boat trip; provisions; emergency clothes and food carried in a boat	"used in the plural, angyeghetat, for a set of such emergency supplies; neqekragmeng angyeghetameng tunqughiinkut taan’gani ‘he gave us pilot bread taken from the emergency supplies’"	аңӥыӷытақ
angyeghnak	pos	IPA	alaska blackfish (Dallia pectoralis)	No information given.	аңӥыӷнак
angyengestaq	pos	IPA	small boat used for hunting birds	#NAME?	аңӥыңыстақ
angyi-	pos	IPA	to make a boat; to play under an overturned boat (of an animal)	No information given.	аңӥи-
angyii-	pos	IPA	to hover over something; to circle over something	usually of birds but figuratively of people; angyiiguq ‘it is hovering over something’; angyiigaa ‘it is hovering over it’ / angyiigughtuq or angyiighwaghtuq ‘it keeps on hovering’	аңӥӣ-
angyilghagh-	pos	IPA	to put on a boat rack	angyilghaghaa ‘he put it on a boat rack’ /	аңӥилӷаӷ-
angyilghaq	pos	IPA	rack for storing a boat	"used in the plural, angyilghat, for one rack"	аңӥилӷақ
angyiqe-	pos	IPA	to trouble a boat (of a whale playing directly under it); to play under the boat	Aghveq angyiquq angyamta asingani. ‘A whale played under our boat.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 29)	аңӥиқы-
angyite-	pos	IPA	for there to be many boats out in the ocean	No information given.	аңӥиты-
anighaaghte-	pos	IPA	to act (on) more than before or as much as possible	anighaaghlluni aghnaghaq qiyamalghii ‘the girl is crying much more than before’	аниӷāҳты-
anighqun1	pos	IPA	torch; fire starter; lighter; candle	"anighqutmeng keneqluta unugtukut kenghiisamta ‘we spent the night getting light from a candle since we lost power’; anighqukaghaq kumaghtigu ‘light the small candle’; anighqutfak ‘large torch or flare’; cf. aniighqwaa-, aniighwte-"	аниҳқун1
anighqun2	pos	IPA	wooly lousewort (Pedicularis lanata)	No information given.	аниҳқун2
anighta	pos	IPA	it used to be (wishfully or nostalgically)	particle; anighta tawatetaqsalghiikut ‘it used to be that way for us (but alas it isn't any more)’	аниҳта
anighte-	pos	IPA	to make up one’s mind; to stay a certain way; to be determined	alaghrang laalighhnaluni anightuq ‘she made up her mind to visit’; anuqa aywaaneng angightuq ‘the wind coninued to blow from the north’; kilgaaquskata anightuq ellngallu pinaluni ‘he is determined to run when they run a long distance’; cf. aanighte-	аниҳты-
anigu	pos	IPA	snow on ground	No information given.	анигу
anigullugte-	pos	IPA	for snow to be soft and melting (as in spring)	anigullugtuq or anigullugtaa ‘the snow is soft and melting’	анигульюхты-
anigulluugte-	pos	IPA	for snow to be soft and melting (as in spring)	anigulluugtuq or anigulluugtaa ‘the snow is soft and melting’	анигулью̄хты-
anigungiite-	pos	IPA	for snow to haved melted or evaporated and disappeared	anigungiituq or anigungiitaa ‘the snow is gone’ /	анигуңӣты-
anigusiigh-	pos	IPA	to cut blocks of snow for melting into water	No information given.	анигусӣӷ-
anigute-	pos	IPA	to be snowed in	"anigutuq or anigutaa ‘he is snowed in’ / Angyaghput anigulluni, peketulluku nusugaghput. ‘As our boat was snowed in, we had to shovel it to pull it out.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 129)"	анигуты-
aniguvzeghaq	pos	IPA	first snow on ground in fall	No information given.	анигувзыӷақ
aniighqwaa-	pos	IPA	to get or be red-hot	aniighqwaaguq or aniighqwaagaa ‘it is getting red-hot’; cf. anighqun	анӣҳқӱā-
aniighwte-	pos	IPA	to get or be red-hot	aniighwngalghii ‘red-hot one’; cf. anighqun	анӣҳӱты-
animaaghnaq	pos	IPA	large walrus without tusks	Chukotkan (R)	анимāӷнақ
aningugh-	pos	IPA	to escape from; to struggle through; to wait out	eslalluk aningughhneghsiimakangat yuget igleghsughngaaghmeng ‘the men waited out the rain before they moved on’; ighninghhaghhaq kaviqragllagluni aningughlluumaaq ‘the infant escaped the chicken pox epidemic’	аниңуӷ-
aningughlluk	pos	IPA	obstacle	No information given.	аниңуҳльюк
aningughvik	pos	IPA	exit; outlet; a way out	mellaasaghiinkut sikum taglamun iwernga aningughvigek kaatagput uwani ‘we almost got caught in the ice while coming home but we found a way out in the area further west’	аниңуӷвик
aningwaagh-	pos	IPA	to get a boil	aningwaaghtuq or aningwaaghaa ‘he got a boil’ /	аниңӱāӷ-
aningwaaq	pos	IPA	boil; carbuncle	No information given.	аниңӱāқ
anipa	pos	IPA	owl; snowy owl (Nyctea scandiaca)	No information given.	анипа
anipaghllak	pos	IPA	snowy owl (Nyctea scandiaca) (specifically)	No information given.	анипаҳльяк
anleghaq	pos	IPA	walrus moving south in fall	No information given.	анлыӷақ
anpaghqe-	pos	IPA	to speak or sing loudly (of men); to raise one’s voice to emphasize what one is saying	anpaghquq ‘he raised his voice’; atulghiit saghiighqesalghiimeng anpaghqut ‘when the singers really got enthusiastic they sang loud’; sangami taana anpaghqa? ‘why is that person so loud?’	анпаҳқы-
anughaqe-	pos	IPA	to train; to exercise	anughaquq ‘he exercised’ / aqelqaghniighyaghqasi anughaquteki ‘train to challenge your visitors (who are coming to compete)’; kayaalqiinaluteng anughaqegkaagut ‘they were training and exercising so that they could win’	ануӷақы-
anumi-	pos	IPA	favoring; concerned for	emotional root; anumikaa or anumiyukaa ‘he favors him or feels concern for him’; anuminaghtuq ‘he is such that people watch out for him or favor him’; anuminaayugtuq ‘he acts in such a way that people will favor him’; uninnaqsaghaa anumiyukaa ‘he was going to leave her behind but felt concerned about her’	ануми-
anuqae	pos	IPA	wind	anuqngituq ‘there is no wind’	ануқаы
anuqataghaaghte-	pos	IPA	for wind to pick up	anuqataghaaghtaa ‘the wind is picking up’	ануқатаӷāҳты-
anuqataghaq	pos	IPA	wind that is picking up; breeze	"Esgha, enngaatall pinightuten, kinquvek anuqataghaghmi whanga piineqnakevnga. ‘Look you are very fine, when you dry in the breeze  you can paint me.’ (AANGHHAQ 27)"	ануқатаӷақ
anuqeghrukutaaghllak	pos	IPA	hurricane or similar storm	No information given.	ануқыӷрукутāҳльяк
anuqesuusiq	pos	IPA	weathervane; wind-sock	No information given.	ануқысю̄сиқ
anuqetat	pos	IPA	waves caused by the wind	No information given.	ануқытат
anuqligh-	pos	IPA	to get or be windy	anuqlighaa ‘it got windy’	ануқльиӷ-
anurga	pos	IPA	permanent or eternal ice or snow	No information given.	анурга
anusi-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > anusigaa-, anusimighte-, anusimighllagh-"	ануси-
"anusigaa-, anusiyaa-"	pos	IPA	to be tired of something that is annoying or painful	anusigaataa ‘he is tired of it’; Mekelghiighhaam gguusiqelleni anusigaalluku gguutniightemun piiq. ‘The little boy got tired of his toothache and went to the dentist.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 26)	"анусигā-, анусиӥā-"
anusimighte-	pos	IPA	"to not want to repeat one's actions due to having seen their consequences; to have ""learned one's lesson"""	"anusimightuq ‘he won't repeat what he did’; ‘anusimightaa he made it so that he won't repeat what he did, ""taught him a lesson""’/ Aghnaghaghhaq qalingunani an’gighluni anusimightuq qayughllak aghighllagaa. ‘The little girl learned her lesson from staying out without a raincoat because she got all wet.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 26)"	анусимиҳты-
anusimingllagh-	pos	IPA	to punish	Taagken nanqigtistem kelengakistemun anusimingllaghtesnayukangaten. ‘And the judge would punish you to the maximum extent.’ (Matthew 5:25)	анусимиңльяӷ-
anusimingllaghaq	pos	IPA	inmate of jail	No information given.	анусимиңльяӷақ
anusimingllaghvik	pos	IPA	jail; prison	No information given.	анусимиңльяӷвик
anyenae	pos	IPA	onion	also used in Chukotka	анӥынаы
apa	pos	IPA	grandfather	No information given.	апа
apaate-	pos	IPA	to estimate size; to give directions; to set the price of something	"cf. apagh-, apegh-"	апāты-
apaavak	pos	IPA	fishhook	Chukotkan (R); questioned; cf. anaavak ‘net for catching birds’	апāвак
apagh-	pos	IPA	to beckon; to gesture to come	apaghaa ‘he beckoned to her’ / apaghiiq ‘he beckoned to someone’; Ilanka apaghanka naghaaghesqelluki. ‘I signaled to my friends to come so they can play.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 30)	апаӷ-
apaghyughluq	pos	IPA	great-grandfather	Chukotkan (R)	апаӷьюӷлюқ
apalla	pos	IPA	vagina	No information given.	апалья
apallengya-	pos	IPA	to cry and fuss without reason (of children)	apallengyaaq ‘he is fussing’/ apallengyaatkaa ‘he is fussing over it’; taghnughhaam apallengyaatkumakanga naghaaghun ‘the child is fussing over the toy’	апальыңья-
apalluq1	pos	IPA	chorus of song; the first part of an Eskimo song with verse following a part with melody only	Atuun apallaaneng aanqutaat. ‘They started the song from the verse.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 30)	апальюқ1
apalluq2	pos	IPA	reason behind something; cause	apallaa ‘his reason’; Tengegkayuget taginghitut apalluqluku eslalluk. ‘The airplane did not come on account of the rain.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 30)	апальюқ2
apangiighhaq	pos	IPA	grandfather	endearing term	апаңӣҳақ
apanqigun	pos	IPA	honorary grandparent (not related by blood)	Chukotkan (R)	апанқигун
apapa	pos	IPA	food (baby word)	No information given.	апапа
apapaagh-	pos	IPA	to give food in honor of a new baby (given by baby’s parents going house to house)	No information given.	апапаӷусиқ
apapaaghusiq	pos	IPA	gift of food in honor of new baby given by baby’s parents going house to house	No information given.	апапаӷусиқ
Apapaaq	pos	IPA	Upapak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Апапāқ
apaqaqu-	pos	IPA	to give order(s); to be in charge of; to gesticulate	Chukotkan (R); questioned	апақақу-
apaqu-	pos	IPA	to direct; to instruct; to gesture	"apaquuq ‘he is directing’ / apaqutaa ‘he is directing her’; Tuuslaghllalghiit apaqumeng aleghquqayuget. ‘One can use sign language when talking to a deaf person.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 30); cf. apagh-, apegh-"	апақу-
Apavgu	pos	IPA	Apavawook Cape on St. Lawrence Is.	No information given.	Апавгу
apayepayiiq	pos	IPA	spider	No information given.	апаӥыпаӥӣқ
apegh-1	pos	IPA	to tell; to confess; to tell on or about	"apeghtuq ‘he told or confessed what he did’; aapghaa ‘he told on her, told about it’ / apeghvikaa ‘he confided in her’; apelleq ‘something told’; Angyaghpaget esghaghluki aapghanka ilamnun, aapghesqelluki ilangitnunllu. ‘After I saw the ship I told about it to the others, askim them to tell about it to the rest of them.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 31)"	апыӷ-1
apegh-2	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > apeghiigh-, apeghyagh-"	апыӷ-2
apeghiigh-	pos	IPA	to finish; to complete; after ––	"apeghiightuq ‘it got finished’; apeghiighaa ‘he finished it’ / apeghiiqaq ‘finished work’; Neneghmeng apeghiighyamek allighat saaglluki ingaghllutek qavaamalghiik.’ ‘Whey they2 finished eating, after spreading the sleeping mat they lay down and slept.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP.  13); Taagken apeghiighluteng neghuutut siivanlleghet, … ‘After they did that, the elders ate together, …’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:190)"	апыӷӣӷ-
apeghiighsagh-	pos	IPA	to get ready; to prepare	apeghiighsaghtuq ‘he got ready’; apeghiighsaghaa ‘he got it ready’ / nanevgaq ellnginaghhaq kitumtuq apeghiighsaataqagu neghyaghqameng ‘I wonder who gets food ready for the old man who lives all alone’	апыӷӣҳсяӷ-
apeghragh-	pos	IPA	to betray; to give secrets away	"apeghraghaa ‘he gave away her secrets’; apeghraghta ‘betrayer, informer’"	апыӷраӷ-
apeghseghuq	pos	IPA	something that has been talked about; headlines (news)	apeghseghuuguq ‘he or it made the headlines in the news’	апыҳсыӷуқ
apeghsughuq	pos	IPA	honorable one; famous one; well-known one	Chukotkan (R)	апыҳсюӷуқ
apeghtugh-	pos	IPA	to teach	"apeghtughaa ‘he taught him’ / apeghtughiiq ‘he taught, is teaching’"	апыҳтуӷ-
apeghtughista	pos	IPA	teacher	No information given.	апыҳтуӷиста
apeghtuusaq	pos	IPA	rule; commandment; teaching	No information given.	апыҳтӯсяқ
apeghyagh-	pos	IPA	to get something ready; to finish something	No information given.	апыӷьяӷ-
apeneq	pos	IPA	talkative person; gossip (person who gossips)	Chukotkan (R)	апынық
apeng-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > apengqe-, apengte-, apenglleq"	апың-
apenghaan	pos	IPA	fresh fluffy snow	apenghaatmi nanuum tumangi tuumsaghanka ‘I followed the tracks of a polar bear in the fresh snow’	апынӷāн
apenglleq	pos	IPA	small pressure ridge in sea ice field; ice pieces or pile on top of pressure ridge	see item 7 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	апыңльық
apengqe-	pos	IPA	to get stooped over (as from old age); to be folded over	aghnalqwaaghhaq apengqegkaq ‘the little old woman got stooped over from old age’	апыңқы-
apengte-	pos	IPA	to fold; to shorten by folding	apengtaa ‘he folded it ‘/ aghnaghaam apengsimakek atkuyaaghegni ‘the girl shortened her dress’	апыңты-
apenqigte-	pos	IPA	to repeat; to say again	No information given.	апынқихты-
apetaq	pos	IPA	tattletale; informer	No information given.	апытақ
apetuqaq	pos	IPA	lazy person	Chukotkan (R)	апытуқақ
apetuyuugte-	pos	IPA	to hesitate; to give an excuse	apetuyuugtuq ‘he gave an excuse’ / kayutnguluku aqfayaghaqa apetuyuugteqrugtuq ‘I sought him out as a helper but he hesitated (gave an excuse)’; apetuyuugsaghluni maligutuq ‘after hesitating for a while he went along’	апытую̄хты-
apghusiigh-	pos	IPA	to hesitate and/or give an excuse; to be unenthusiastic; to be uninterested; to be unfavorable (of weather)	apghusiightuq ‘he showed no interest’/ maninginniluni apghusiightuq ‘saying he has no money he gave an excuse (to not give any)’ maligusughngaaghma ullghitagka apghusiighutkagka guunneghllugek ‘even though I wanted to go along I hesitated concerning my snow machine which is hard to start’; esla enraq apghusiightuq ‘the weather is not favorable’	апҳусӣӷ-
apumek	pos	IPA	soft snow or dirt	No information given.	апумык
apumgute-	pos	IPA	to thrust or throw into soft snow or dirt; to plunge or bury oneself in soft snow or dirt	"apumgutuq ‘it buried itself in the snow’ or ‘he plunged into the snow’; apumgutaa ‘he threw it into the soft snow’ / Mekelghiighhaq qetgeghluni apumgutuq anigumun, … ‘The little boy jumped and plunged into the snow, …’ (SLI JR. DICT. 31)"	апумгуты-
apunaqaqe-	pos	IPA	to request permission to be absent	Chukotkan (R); questioned	апунақақы-
aputiisaq	pos	IPA	gift; donation; meat given to someone near the site of butchering or met along the way	kitum taam aputiisaaneng neqmeng gaaghumalghii ‘she cooked the meat that somebody had given (her)’	апутӣсяқ
aputite-	pos	IPA	to give harvested or hunted item to (someone met near site)	"tepaghtamineng aputitaanga nallaghluku tepaghniilghii ‘he gave me some seashore-creatures that he had gotten, when I ran into him while he was getting seashore-creatures’"	апутиты-
aqaleghyak	pos	IPA	multicolored thing; motley thing; multi-hued thing	"Chukotkan (R);  Taagken kenlanga meteghlluk tagneghtaa, teghla aqaleghyagughtaa. ‘From then on the raven has been black, and the owl has become multi-hued.’ (AANGHHAQ 28)"	ақалыӷьяк
aqapetug-	pos	IPA	to flap wings while remaining stationary in midair; to hover (bird)	yuungaaghaq aqapetugluni aagestuq ‘the jaeger flapped its wings and stayed where it was for a long time’; aqapetugtuq yuungaaghaq afsengaghmeng esghaalluni ‘the jaeger hovered over a mouse when it saw it’	ақапытуг-
aqara	pos	IPA	frozen layer of ice and snow over ground causing death of reindeer	qavngaq Sivuqaq quyngightupigsalghii aqaram naangeghllakaa ‘long ago St. Lawrence Island used to have lots of reindeer but starvation (due to ice covering the ground) reduced the number greatly’; cf. aqayghaq	ақара
aqavzik	pos	IPA	cloudberry; lowbush salmonberry (Rubus chamaemorus)	No information given.	ақавзик
aqayamaawi-	pos	IPA	to take a long time to heal due to repeated trauma	aagutaatam kililleni aqayamaawisimaa ‘he’s having his wound take a long time to heal on account of repeated bumping’	ақаямāӱи-
aqayghaq	pos	IPA	slimy green algae on rocks	cf. aqara	ақаӥӷақ
aqeftaghaaq	pos	IPA	skin bag	"Siighnaq aqeftaghaaq neqmeng imiimakanga. ‘She filled the skin bag, (made of) walrus stomach, with food.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 69)"	ақыфтаӷāқ
aqeftaghuk	pos	IPA	dulse (an edible seaweed) (Rhodymenia palmata)	No information given.	ақыфтаӷук
Aqeftapagyaq	pos	IPA	point on western shore of Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ақыфтарагьяқ
Aqeftapak	pos	IPA	Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices; cf. aqeftaghuk	Ақыфтапак
aqelqaame-	pos	IPA	to be a guest of; to stay with	No information given.	ақыльāмы-
aqelqaghniigh-	pos	IPA	to challenge guests or be challenged by guests in contests and games	No information given.	ақыльқаӷнӣӷ-
aqelqaghte-	pos	IPA	to be a guest	No information given.	ақыльқаҳты-
aqelqaq	pos	IPA	guest	No information given.	ақыльқақ
aqelqiqe-	pos	IPA	to have guests	No information given.	ақыльқиқы-
aqelqiqfik	pos	IPA	guest house; hotel	No information given.	ақыльқиқфик
aqelughraq	pos	IPA	walrus swimming in a certain direction	Chukotkan (R)	ақылюӷрақ
aqemghaq	pos	IPA	effect that causes the husband of a pregnant woman to be unsucessful at hunting	"aqemghalek quyughllak enkaam esgha unguvaastaqughllak ‘because he’s a man with a pregnant wife they (the animals he’s hunting) continue to live (that is, he doesn’t catch them)’"	ақымӷақ
aqergiiq	pos	IPA	willow ptarmigan (Lagopus lagopus); rock ptarmigan (Lagopus mutus)	aqergiighet ‘ptarmigans’	ақыргӣқ
"aqeri-, aqerite-"	pos	IPA	to get nauseated from eating too much of one food	aqeriiq or aqerituq ‘he got nauseous from eating too much of a particular food’; neghepagpenasi aqerillequsi ‘don’t eat so much or you’ll be sick of eating that kind of food’	"ақыри-, ақыриты-"
aqesgiigh-	pos	IPA	to sneeze	aqesgiightuq ‘he sneezed’ /	ақысхӣӷ-
aqevgaghnak	pos	IPA	thick-billed murre (Uria lomvia)	No information given.	ақывгаӷнак
aqevghaq	pos	IPA	emblem sew onto parka in recognition of expertise at something	No information given.	ақывӷақ
aqevleghaq	pos	IPA	"small, dangling decoration on a parka"	aghnalqwaaghaam aghsughtaa aqevleghaghllak ‘the little old woman's gutskin parka has lots of dangling decorations’	ақывлыӷақ
aqfa-1	pos	IPA	to fetch; to go get	aqfaa ‘he fetched it’ / aqfaqughaa ‘he fetched it quickly’	ақфа-1
aqfa-2	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > aqfaqugh-, aqfaate-, aqfayngwaag-"	ақфа-2
aqfaagh-	pos	IPA	to invite; to call on; to challenge	Chukotkan (V&E)	ақфāӷ-
aqfaasnaq	pos	IPA	running	"adverbial particle; aqfaasnaq igaghvigmun taglaghtunga ‘I went running up to the schoolhouse’; Tawani nagataghlluni aga aqfaasnaq ukigyalghiimi, ukigyalghiimi aga iteghtuq, iteghtuq. ‘After she had listened for a short time, she went running down, and when she ran down, she went in; yes, she went in.’ (KALLAGNEGHET 10); Aqfaasnaq igaghvigmun taglaghtungaa. ‘I went running up to the schoolhouse.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 32)"	ақфāсьақ
aqfaate-	pos	IPA	to run	aqfaatuq ‘he is running’ / aqfaatutaa ‘he ran with it’	ақфāты-
aqfaayngwaag-	pos	IPA	to trot	Nanuq aqfaayngwaagmeng qimagtuq. ‘The polar bear got away trotting along.’ 	ақфāӥңӱāг-
aqfaqugh-	pos	IPA	to jog; to run for exercise	No information given.	ақфақуӷ-
aqfasuk	pos	IPA	red-breasted merganser (Mergus serrator)(SLI meaning); pintail duck (Anas acuta)(Chukotka meaning)	No information given.	ақфасюк
aqfate-	pos	IPA	to fetch something; to go get something	aqfatuq ‘he fetched something’; aqfataa ‘he fetched something for him’ / Unaaq aqfatunga qawaagmeng elpesineng. ‘This morning I went and got some birds from your house.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 32)	ақфаты-
Aqfayegaak	pos	IPA	Akfayegak Creek on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ақфаӥыгāк
aqfayngwaag-	pos	IPA	"to trot; to gallop or run fast (of reindeer, bear, etc.)"	No information given.	ақфаӥңӱāг-
"aqighta, aqightuta"	pos	IPA	meteor	questioned	"ақиҳта, ақиҳтута"
aqii-	pos	IPA	to take a pleasure trip; to go on a vacation; to take an early spring boat trip; to go south toward Anadyr (Chukotkan meaning)	aqiiguq ‘he went on a pleasure trip ‘/	ақӣ-
aqiilwagh-	pos	IPA	to overnight along the way while traveling	igleghat tumangani aqiilwaghaqluteng nunaaghmeggnun aglaghtut ‘those who travel to their camp overnight along the way’	ақӣлӱаӷ-
aqiiyag-	pos	IPA	to arrive as a visitor from afar	No information given.	ақӣяг-
aqiiyak	pos	IPA	visitor from afar	Sivungameng aqiiyaget kaatut ‘the visitors from Savoonga arrived’	ақӣяк
aqimlae	pos	IPA	liquor; bottle (especially of liquor)	No information given.	ақимляы
aqimle-	pos	IPA	to drink liquor	Chukotkan (R)	ақимлы-
aqimleghutaq	pos	IPA	bottle	"used in the dual, aqimleghutak, for one bottle; Melnguut qafsinat aqimleghutagnun kanaghtanka igaghvigmi liisaghqaaluki. ‘I put several beetles in a bottle to study them in school.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 99)"	ақимлыӷутақ
aqina-	pos	IPA	to be envious	aqinaaq ‘he is envious’ /	ақина-
aqinake-	pos	IPA	to be envious over (it)	aqinakaa ‘he is envious over it’ /	ақинакы-
aqlaaghmig-	pos	IPA	to stir up a draft; to set air in motion; to emanate vapors	"aqlaaghmigaa ‘it caused a draft on it’; aqfaasnaq naghughlleghhii aqlaaghmigutuq ‘the one running fast by caused a draft’; aqlaaghmillghem nanim kengha pamastaa ‘the draft made the lamp’s flame flicker’; naghughlleghiim aqlaaghmillgha tepengllaasighpagnituq ‘the air set into motion by, or emanating from, the passerby smells of perfume’; qawaak yaqiiluni aqlaaghmigaa ‘the bird flapped its wings and set the air in motion’"	ақлья̄ӷамиг-
aqlagh-	pos	IPA	to dry up after a rain (of ground)	No information given.	ақльяӷ-
aqlagha	pos	IPA	cold air; coldness in the air	No information given.	ақльяӷа
aqlaghaghraag-	pos	IPA	to be somewhat cold	No information given.	ақльяӷаӷрāг-
aqlaghaghte-	pos	IPA	for weather to get cold	aqlaghaghtuq ‘it got cold’	ақльяӷаҳты-
aqlaghate-	pos	IPA	for it to be cold (weather)	aqlaghatuq ‘it is cold’	ақльяӷаты-
aqnigh-	pos	IPA	to be in pain	= angqigh-	ақньиӷ-
aqnighmillaghqe	pos	IPA	to suddenly start to hurting	Chukotkan (R)	ақньиӷмильяҳқы-
aqnighnagh- 	pos	IPA	to be painful	No information given.	ақньиӷнаӷ-
aqnighneq	pos	IPA	illness	No information given.	ақньиӷнық
aqnighqe-	pos	IPA	to have or cause pain; to hurt	aqnighquq ‘he is in pain’; aqnighqaa ‘he hurt her ‘/	ақньиҳқы-
aqnighte-	pos	IPA	to hurt; to get hurt	aqnightuq ‘he got hurt’; aqnightaa ‘he hurt her ‘/	ақньиҳты-
aqniilngagh-	pos	IPA	to endure pain; to cause pain	aqniilngaghtuq ‘he endured pain’; aqniilngaghaa ‘he caused her to suffer pain (as by hitting her or throwing something at her)’ /	ақньӣлңаӷ-
aqniima-	pos	IPA	to to be a compassionate person	aqniimaaq ‘she is a compassionate person’ / aqniimalghiim aghnam yaywaali aatkangllaqaa nangllegyagutem ‘the compassionate woman made clothes for the orphan out of pity’	ақьнӣма-
aqniqe-	pos	IPA	to feel emotional attachment to someone or something; to feel fondness or tenderness toward (him)	aqniqaqa ilughaghma paniga ‘I have tender feelings for my cousin’s daughter’; atkuyaaghegka aqniqagka tuuneghmeng ‘I would hate to part with my dress by giving away’	ақньиқы-
aqnistalghii	pos	IPA	one who is easily hurt	No information given.	ақньисталӷӣ
aqsa1	pos	IPA	belly	aqsat ‘bellies’	ақся1
aqsa2; aqsak	pos	IPA	back of animal	quyngim aqsakek ‘the reindeer’s back’	"ақся2, ақсяк"
aqsaghmikun	pos	IPA	back to back	particle	ақсяӷмикун
aqsaghwaaq	pos	IPA	the back part of man’s parka	Chukotkan (R)	ақсаӷӱāқ
aqsagmig-	pos	IPA	to put something on one’s back for carrying there	No information given.	ақсягмиқы-
aqsalek	pos	IPA	pregnant woman	No information given.	ақсялык
aqsalgu-	pos	IPA	to be pregnant	aqsalguuq ‘she is pregnant’ /	ақсялгу-
aqsallineq	pos	IPA	upper abdomen below sternum	No information given.	ақсяльинық
aqsalliqe-	pos	IPA	to have a stomachache	aqsalliquq ‘he has a stomachache’	ақсяльиқы-
aqsamuk	pos	IPA	belly; salmon belly	No information given.	ақсямук
aqsanguma-	pos	IPA	to be pregnant	No information given.	ақсяңума-
aqsaqughiitaq	pos	IPA	snack to keep the stomach from growling	No information given.	ақсяқуӷӣтақ
aqsaqughiitigh-	pos	IPA	to snack to keep the stomach from growling	aqsaqughiitightuq ‘he had a snack’ / aqsaqughiitiqaghluni navek pillequnga ‘after I have a little snack I’ll go somewhere’; aqsaqughiitiilta sivukluta ‘let’s snack first’	ақсяқуӷӣтиӷ-
aqsaquq	pos	IPA	stomach organ	Ayvemta aqsaqghwa imanameng imaqeftuq. ‘The stomach of our walrus (the walrus we caught) was full of clams.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 33)	ақсяқуқ
aqsi-	pos	IPA	to wash one's back	aqsiiq ‘he washed his own back’; aqsii ‘he washed his (another’s) back’ /  aqsiiquq ‘he is washing his back; he regularly washes his back’	ақси-
aqsiqe-	pos	IPA	to have a stomachache	aqsiquq ‘he has a stomachache’	ақсиқы-
Aqulakaq	pos	IPA	Akoolokok Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Ақулякақ
aqume-	pos	IPA	to sit down	aqumuq ‘he sat down’ /	ақумы-
aqumga-	pos	IPA	to be sitting	aqumgaaq ‘he is sitting’ /	ақумга-
Aqumuq	pos	IPA	November	"literally ‘it sat’, referring to the sun starting to “sit” low in the sky, never rising many degrees over the horizon, during the winter months; also listed in various sources as October, November-December; December, and January"	Ақумуқ
aqumutaq	pos	IPA	chair; seat	"used in the dual, aqumutak, for one chair"	ақумутақ
aqupiitaq	pos	IPA	sled load-cover/mat to sit on (usually made of polar bear skin)	neghighluku aqupiitat atuqepigtiit qimugsimun ‘years ago they regularly used polar bear pelt load-cover/mats when dog sledding’; aqupiitighlukek qamiyek aqumuq ‘he put a load-cover/mat on the sled and sat down’; cf. aqume-	ақупӣтақ
aqupilegh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root: > aqupileghnagh-, aqupileghragh-, aqupilghsagh-, aqupileghyug-"	ақупилыӷ-
aqupileghnagh-	pos	IPA	to make one feel obligated; to be the recipient of hints that someone needs or wants something	"Nateghmi utaqiilghaaten. Legan kanaaghlluku aqupileghnaghqeghngaata wata, qineghsaqunang. ‘Stay in the outer room. Just hand it in to them; no matter how much they coax or hint, don’t even look in.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198)"	ақупилыӷнаӷ-
aqupileghragh-	pos	IPA	to ask hesitantly; to hint to be given something	aqupileghralghii kayusiitaghhnaqaqa ‘I am going to help her because she has been hinting (that she needs help)’	ақупилыӷраӷ-
aqupileghsagh-	pos	IPA	to hint to be given something	"Atamnun tuunagka aqupileghsaghaatkegkek ulimaaghminun atuqnalukek, usputaasiqumaagkenka iyaqraasiqumaagkenka. ‘I gave it to my father since he kept hinting that he could use it for carving, measuring things, and decorating (his carvings).’ (KALLAG. 49)"	ақупилыҳсаӷ-
aqupileghyug-	pos	IPA	to feel obligated to help	No information given.	ақупилыӷьюг-
aqupilqe-	pos	IPA	to come to someone’s aid; to help	"ullghitakek yugem anigumi apumgullutek nusuneghmeng aghughlukek, eltughani kayagtaqaa estugaghmun, “mekelghiighet naliitanguq aqupilqennaqlitnga” ‘a man got his vehicle stuck in the snow and couldn’t pull it out so he sent his grandson to the store to ask, “are there any boys who can come help me”"	ақупильқы-
aqutaghwaaq	pos	IPA	"game for young boys, played with two sticks"	"one stick, on the ground, has a small peg near the end while the other is held in the hand and has a string tied to the end; the other end of the string is wrapped around the peg on the stick on the ground; jerking the hand-held stick makes the other stick jump into the air and then slowly gyrate to the ground; formerly this game was played in celebration of catching a whale"	ақутаӷӱāқ
aquutagh-	pos	IPA	to steer	No information given.	ақӯтаӷ-
aquutaq	pos	IPA	rudder	No information given.	ақӯтақ
aragh-	pos	IPA	to shout; to yell; to scream; to holler	araghtuq ‘he shouted’; araghaa ‘he shouted at her’ / aratuqaq ‘one who screams a lot’	араӷ-
araghaatagh-	pos	IPA	to scream	araghaataghtuq ‘he screamed’	араӷāтаӷ-
aragyulga	pos	IPA	small kettle for making hot beverage	Chukotkan (R)	арагьюлга
arasqa	pos	IPA	old walrus skin on a winter tent	Chukotkan (R)	арасқа
arekull	pos	IPA	but it had already happened; already	particle; utaqaanka kaatelleghqii arekull kaasimalghiit ‘I was waiting for them to arrive but they had already arrived’; Arekull Balena-m nalighneghaneng makreghqullghuftut. ‘They had already peeled off from some part of the (ship) Balena.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)	арыкуль
arekulnguq	pos	IPA	but it had already happened	particle	арыкулңуқ
aremaataq	pos	IPA	"hook at end of kukilnget, the chain used for holding pot over seal-oil lamp"	No information given.	арымāтақ
argughagh-	pos	IPA	to return while boating after the boat has drifted with the current	Chukotkan (R)	аргуӷаӷ-
argughaq	pos	IPA	walrus going west or south	Chukotkan (R)	аргуӷақ
arguta	pos	IPA	leash or tether to hold whip to sled	"Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, argutet, for one rope"	аргута
ari 	pos	IPA	land or river otter (Lutra canadensis); sea otter (Enhydra lutris) 	neither the land nor sea otter is found in the St. Lawrence Is. area	ари
arkamaaka	pos	IPA	"corner pole of the aagra, the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	Chukotkan (R)	ашкамāка
Armaramket	pos	IPA	a particular clan	originally from Chukotka; = Aymaramket; singular is Armaramka	Армарамкыт
armi	pos	IPA	army	No information given.	арми
arughsit	pos	IPA	houses seen from a distance offshore	plural; Arughsit pama aliightut. ‘The houses are now visible up there.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 33); cf. aruugh-	аруҳсит
Arutu	pos	IPA	site near Cape Cherkasskogo (near the mouth of Tkachen Bay Chukotka)	see Map 3 in Appendices	Аруту
aruugh-	pos	IPA	to watch for sea mammals on the ice; to call out for someone whose arrival is anticipated; to observe from a height	aruughtuq ‘he watched or is watching’; aruughaa ‘he watched or is watching for it or him’ / aruughvik ‘observation place on higher ground’	арӯӷ-
"asaghlak, asaghrak"	pos	IPA	gills	Chukotkan (R)	"асяӷляк, асяӷрак"
asak	pos	IPA	paternal aunt; one's father's sister	asaga ‘his aunt’	асяк
asalughaq	pos	IPA	anvil or thing used as an anvil	uyghak asalughaqluku uyghiin agughpagtekaq saagtaa ‘I used a large rock as an anvil for (straightening) the bent part of the (dogteam) anchor’	асялюӷақ
asalughigh-	pos	IPA	to use something as an anvil	uyghagmeng asalughighlunga tuquqaq kaagtughaqa ‘I used a rock as an anvil and pounded on a nail’	асядюӷиӷ-
asangsi	pos	IPA	furthermore; even more so	"particle; asangsi qeghaatkat nefkuurat neqnipigniiqiit ‘they say that the dried meat hung on the racks is even more delicious’; Asangsi ugika tagikuni qevuulluni quyallequq. ‘Furthermore, when my husband arrives he’ll be very, very thankful.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 36)"	асяңси
asanut	pos	IPA	as long as; at least	"particle; unugsighngaaghmeng asanut pinitun piqaghtaqegkuyeng ‘as long as they behave it is alright for them stay out late’; asanut pinighluki nagaqumteki itagnaghillequkut ‘at least if we hear that they are okay we’ll be fine’; Asanut elpek espamavek tunuqlighhamnnun aglaghpenang piiqi! ‘At least, you must never to to that one back there.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 134)"	асянут
aseghena	pos	IPA	very slightly salty water; brackish water	naayvam esneghalgem megha aseghena ‘the water of the lake with a lagoon opening out to the sea is very slightly salty’; aseghenaghughngaan qayungllaalta ‘let’s make tea even though it (the water) is brackish’	асыӷына
asemeghqe-	pos	IPA	to be involved in an accident or other calamity	"nani asemeghqumaat, aviitut ‘somewhere they may have been involved in an accident, they are gone’"	асымыҳқы-
asenge-	pos	IPA	to owe (him); to be in debt to (him)	asengaa ‘he is in debt to her ‘/	асыңы-
asi1	pos	IPA	area under; lower part	"asingani ‘under it, lower part of it’; asingighaa ‘he put something under it’; naaygham asilighneghani ‘on the lower part of the mountain’; asingaaneng ‘from the bottom of it’; asiinganeng ‘from the very bottom’ "	аси1
asi2	pos	IPA	area in the winter tent where the head of the bed is located	Chukotkan (R)	аси2
asi3	pos	IPA	back part of a quadruped animal	Chukotkan (R)	аси3
asi4	pos	IPA	tip of harpoon that is tied to a rope	Chukotkan (R)	аси4
asigh-	pos	IPA	tied in a bundle	"postural root; asightaa ‘he tied it’; asighngaaq ‘it is tied up’ / angyam temangi nekeftaqiit tapghagmeng, tapghaaghaghmeng, suqaghmeng uskughangllaqamengllu qepuughaalluqii asighulluki ‘boat frames are erected by lashing parts together and securing them with ropes, cords and strips of baleen’"	асиӷ-
asighneq	pos	IPA	standard size bundle of something	"Enkaam qafsina asighneq, qulaneng uglaghaqluku asightaqluku sangwaa. ‘And how many [in] a bundle? -- they would bundle them, more than ten together.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:92)"	асиӷнық
asighqe-	pos	IPA	to tie up	"asighqaa ‘he tied it, or him, up’"	асиҳқы-
asighutaq	pos	IPA	"strap; rope or cord for tying things in a bundle; cord or rope by which rocks are hung anchoring walrus skin roofing on the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	асиӷутақ
asiighwaaq	pos	IPA	colored trim hem of parka	Chukotkan (R)	асӣӷӱāқ
asiilpak	pos	IPA	rear half of a whale	Chukotkan (R)	асӣльпак
asiiq	pos	IPA	fancy border at hem of parka; part of trunk below waist	No information given.	асӣқ
asiliqutaq	pos	IPA	"pad put under a thing to raise it, to protect the surface underneath, catch a leak, etc.; base"	No information given.	асилиқутақ
asingiitaq	pos	IPA	roller used to move a boat on the beach	No information given.	асиңӣтақ
asingilnguq	pos	IPA	bottomless thing; very deep lake	No information given.	асиңилңуқ
asipgak	pos	IPA	skirt	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	асипхак
asit	pos	IPA	stitches on the bow of a skin boat on the inner and outer surfaces	Chukotkan (R); this is a plural	асит
asitmun	pos	IPA	downwards	particle	аситмун
asivagh-	pos	IPA	to lower; to go down	asivaghtuq ‘it went down’; asivaghaa ‘he lowered it’ /	асиваӷ-
asivaq	pos	IPA	east; wind from east	No information given.	асивақ
asivaqun	pos	IPA	deeply; sleeping deeply	particle	асивақун
"asunan, asunaq"	pos	IPA	soon	particle	"асюнан, асюнақ"
asunat	pos	IPA	only; as before; as usual	particle	асюнут
asunga	pos	IPA	come on; you'd better; and also	Chukotkan; particle	асюңа
asunut	pos	IPA	only if; if only	Chukotkan; particle	асюнут
asuq	pos	IPA	flint	Chukotkan (R)	асюқ
asute-	pos	IPA	to temporarily exchange wives 	Neghighluku yuget nulighqullghiit taghnughhangenghinneghmeggni yuuk nuliilek aapneghmegteggu nuliitek naavghutaqluku pinalutek taghnughhangnalutek taghnughhiilnguuk. Yugenkuk nulighqullghhik aapsimakegket saaqwlighhaagteng nek asunnalutek yugek. ‘Long ago men with their wives who can’t bear children would ask another man to trade wives so that the childless couple could have a child. A man and his wife asked their neighbor if he could exhanges wives.’ (SULUWET 108)	асуты-
ata1	pos	IPA	father	base is ata-: ataka ‘my father’	ата1
ataasighhaaghte-	pos	IPA	to be the only one remaining	ataasighhaaghtuq ‘it was the only one left’	атāсиҳāҳты-
ataasighsigate-	pos	IPA	to be undecided	No information given.	атāсиҳсигаты-
ataasiighmete-	pos	IPA	to be single-minded	No information given.	атāсӣӷмыты-
ataasiighte-	pos	IPA	"to become, or cause to become, one; to make up one’s mind"	Umyugagka ataasiightagka suflugaq tukfighnaluku. ‘I made up my mind to buy the gun.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 169)	атāсӣҳты-
ataasiq	pos	IPA	one	"ataasiq qilugtuq ‘one barked’; ataasimeng qikmilguunga ‘I have one dog’; the plural ataasit, is used to indicate that a noun, though grammatically plural, actually indicates a single entity (or a single kind of entity); for example, ataasit angyat ‘one boat’; ataasit tengegkayuget nalugtut ‘an airplane landed’; Whakenwhaa ghhataquvek mengteghat ataasit kaalleqaten. ‘When you leave from here you will arrive at a single house.’ (UNIGPAGHAGH. 69); Ataasit neqet taakut eghqwaaghusaqaqut. ‘For their offerings they used one and the same kind of food.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:210); Igleghuteghllagluki angyat ataasit…. ‘They moved one boat a long way (on the ice)….’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:116); the dual, ataasik, is used to indicate that a noun, though grammatically dual, actually does indicate a single entity and not two entities; for example, ataasik salngagek ‘one box’; Taagken tawaten uyegsimalutung naanguk qenwat ataasik. ‘The one [case of goods] which we were distributing from ran out.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:126); Naaka pingayugneghneng qiipaghalek. Ataasik qepghaasikek gaaghusikek. ‘My mother had three cloth cover parkas. One was for working and cooking.’ (SULUWET 13; and note that for ‘(one) cloth cover parka’, the dual, qiipaghaak, is often used )"	атāсиқ
ataata	pos	IPA	paternal uncle; father's brother	base is ataata-: ataataka ‘my uncle’	атāта
ataglaawa	pos	IPA	rope tied onto sled	Chukotkan (R)	атагля̄ӱа
atakaghqaq	pos	IPA	"step, foster or adoptive father"	No information given.	атакаҳқақ
atalgun	pos	IPA	paternal uncle's child; parallel cousin on father's side	No information given.	аталгун
Atallghaq	pos	IPA	site in Chukotka west of mouth of Providenia Bay	see Map 2 in Appendices	Атальҳьақ
atalughaq	pos	IPA	small chunk of whale blubber with slices made in the fat down to the chewy layer to facilitate eating (by tearing off pieces)	atalughilluku mangtagmeng tuunumakanga ‘she made partially sliced pieces of whale blubber for him to eat’	аталюӷақ
Ataneghpak	pos	IPA	God	No information given.	Атаныҳпак
ataneq	pos	IPA	"boss; chief; lord; God; main internal pole of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	Yuuk taana atanqaat taakut ulimastet. ‘That man is the boss of the builders.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 35); Atanghi mangtegham llilaghnaqiit. ‘They are going to put up the main supports of the building.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 35)	атанық
atanghuyugneq	pos	IPA	bossy person	No information given.	атанӷуюгнық
atarineq	pos	IPA	the place on a split walrus hide where the two sides remain attached to each other	No information given.	атаринық
ataw	pos	IPA	do it anyway; give it a try; let's	particle; Chukotkan (R)	атаӱ
atawha	pos	IPA	you know; you see	particle	атаӱьа
ategh-	pos	IPA	to go or get down off of something	"ateghtuq ‘he got down’ / ateghtaa ‘he took it down, let it down’; aatghutaa ‘he brought it down for her, or as he came down’; ateghngaaq ‘it has been taken or let down’"	атыӷ-
ateghaasiq	pos	IPA	ceremonial clothes	so called because they are used to go down to whale boat for a ceremony	атыӷāсиқ
ateghaate-	pos	IPA	to go down as a group	ayvelghun ateghaatuq ‘the group of walruses went down together’	атыӷāты-
ateghagh-	pos	IPA	to go down to whale boat for a ceremony marking the beginning of spring hunting	No information given.	атыӷаӷ-
ateghaq	pos	IPA	substitute name; middle name; name of household pet	No information given.	атыӷақ
ateghaq	pos	IPA	ceremony held in spring to mark the beginning of spring hunting	No information given.	атыӷақ
ategherkaq	pos	IPA	mountain spur	Chukotkan (R)	атыӷышкақ
ateghte-1	pos	IPA	for wind to blow toward the sea	"kii, elngaatall tesqakma ateghtaa ‘gee, there is a strong wind blowing toward the sea out there’"	атыҳт-1
ateghte-2	pos	IPA	to put (it) down (into something); to put into liquid	"Nulughyaq, kayu pinghani, nefkaaqluku, mesiighqun ateghtaqluku. Uukaq tawaten ama mesiighmun ateghtaqluku ilanga. '[They would go] jigging, when sculpins were present, drying it, and putting it in oil. Cod too, like that they'd sometimes put in oil [to preserve it].' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:244)"	атыҳт-2
ateligh-	pos	IPA	to name	atelighaa ‘he named him’	атылиӷ-
atengllagh-	pos	IPA	to devise a name; ask; question	atengllaghtuq ‘he came up with a name’	атыңльяӷ-
atengpa	pos	IPA	calling for exchange	Chukotkan (R); questioned	атыңпа
ateq	pos	IPA	name	"aatgha ‘his name’; atepiga ‘his real name, his Yupik name’; aatqa ‘my name’; aatghen ‘your name’"	атық
Ateq	pos	IPA	Atuk Mtn. (and the salty lake near the summit) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Атық
atgenra	pos	IPA	it happened although we no longer wanted it to; it happened too late; unfortunately however	"particle; iitek ighneni qelghwaaghyaghaa angyiisqelluku unaaq, qavaaniluni ighsaaq, atgenra kesiimiita maketuq angyaghnaluni ‘he tried to have his son go boating this morning, he didn’t want to go because he was asleep, too late, after they left, he got up to go boating’; atgenra tengegkayuget kaatut uteghsimaghma ‘the airplane got here anyway after I decided not to go back’; Elngaatalnguq quunpeng esnighqwaghaqelghii taana Singaaweteghllak. Sameng naalkunnaluni elqwaaghhaghmeng. Atgenra avangisagllak. ‘It is said Singaaweteghllak was so very often combing the beach to try to find some seaweeds. But unfortunately there wasn’t any.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:236)"	атхынра
atghaaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to fly south (of birds)	Chukotkan (R)	атҳāҳқуӷ-
atghagh-	pos	IPA	to go down toward the beach; to go from Chukotka to St. Lawrence Is.	No information given.	атҳаӷ-
atghagha-	pos	IPA	to dive into deep water and stay there for a long time without coming up for air	No information given.	атҳаӷа-
atghaghtegh-	pos	IPA	to take one’s hunting equipment down to the beach preparatory to going out hunting by boat	No information given.	атҳаҳтыӷ-
Atghii	pos	IPA	a certain slope east of Gambell which dogteams used to use as a route down into the village	No information given.	Атҳӣ
atghii	pos	IPA	gradual slope	No information given.	атҳӣ
atghii-	pos	IPA	to go down (the hill) gradually	"atghiiguq ‘he went down (the hill) gradually’; atghiigaa ‘he went down on it gradually’ / Uusneghwaaq tevluku atghiiyami sukangitesighwaaghumalghii. ‘After going over the small hill, when he went gradually down, he made the pretense of going slowly.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 69) "	атҳӣ-
atghilegtaaq	pos	IPA	a contest of strength in which contestants pull each other's hooked middle fingers	No information given.	атҳилыхтāқ
atghilek	pos	IPA	middle finger	No information given.	атҳилык
atghilengestaq	pos	IPA	middle toe	Chukotkan (R)	атҳилыңыстақ
atghilgun	pos	IPA	loop for middle finger at end of a sling	Chukotkan (R)	атҳилгун
atigh-1	pos	IPA	to name	atighaa panini naamineng ‘he named his daughter after his mother’	атиӷ-1
atigh-2	pos	IPA	to say	atighaa ‘he said it’ / cf. ateq	атиӷ-2
atightugh-	pos	IPA	to read	"atightughtuq ‘he read’; atightughaa ‘he read it’ / atightughyaghqat ‘things to be read such as brochures, magazines, pamphlets, etc.’; atightughyuggaaghusit ‘the first reader’ (name of a Yupik primer)"	атиҳтуӷ-
atightulleq	pos	IPA	way of reading; reading material	"usually plural, atightullghet, for reading material; aghnaghaam atightullgha pinightuq ‘her way of reading is nice’"	атиҳтульық
atiiqe-	pos	IPA	to name someone after	atiiqaa naani ‘he named someone after his mother’	атӣқы-
atipallagh-	pos	IPA	to single out; to shade in; to emphasize	Chukotkan (R)	атӣпальяӷ-
atkug-	pos	IPA	to put on a parka	atkugtuq ‘he put on a parka’; atkugaa ‘he put a parka on her’ /	аткуг-
atkuk	pos	IPA	parka	"also dual for one, especially for a bird skin and feathers parka: atkugegka ‘my parka’"	аткук
atkuraaghllak	pos	IPA	sheepskin coat	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, akuraaghllagek, for one coat "	аткурāҳльяк
atkuraaq	pos	IPA	garment made from sealskin with European material sewed on it	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, atkuraaghek,  for one such garment"	аткурāқ
atkuyaak	pos	IPA	dress; shirt	"used in the dual, atkuyaagek, for one such garment"	аткуя̄к
atkuyaaq	pos	IPA	dress; Euro-American style garment	No information given.	аткуя̄қ
atneghaq	pos	IPA	point of land; cape	No information given.	атньыӷақ
Atneghaq	pos	IPA	site at Northwest Cape near Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Атньыӷақ
atngaghun	pos	IPA	woman's tattoo on the sides of her nose; front seam with piping on skin-boot	"Iik, iluuq, nayaka tugunayaghan estamaneng atngaghutelek ‘Look, pal, you can take my sister who has four tatoo lines on her nose’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:8); = atngaghutaq"	атңьаӷун
atngaghusigh-	pos	IPA	to tattoo on the side of the nose	No information given.	атңьаӷусиӷ-
atngaghutaq	pos	IPA	woman's tattoo on the sides of her nose; front seam with piping on skin-boot	#NAME?	атңаӷутақ
"atngaghutelek, atngaghutalek"	pos	IPA	"dog with a ""masked"" face"	No information given.	"атңьаӷутылык, атңьаӷуталык"
Atqalghhaaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Атқальҳаӷми(т)
Atqallghaq	pos	IPA	former village between Cape Stoletia and Cape Lesovskogo in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Атқальҳақ
atugh-	pos	IPA	to use; to sing	No information given.	атуӷ-
atughta	pos	IPA	singer of Eskimo songs	No information given.	атуҳта
atunekiite-	pos	IPA	to make equal in some sense	Chukotkan (R); kingutkat atunekiitaqut sivulighnun ‘the ones who came in late are getting themselves equal to the first ones’; cf. atunem	атуныкӣты-
atunem	pos	IPA	together; simultaneously	"particle; yupiklu laluramkallu neghuutuk atunem ‘the Yupik Eskimo and the white man ate together’; Unaami nunamnnun aglaghhaakut. Wiin iteghaalluta nayagput tagimaluku, enkaam atunem neghelghaakut. ‘Let’s go to our village tomorrow. But for now, let’s go inside while our sister is coming, then let’s eat together.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 22); Tawaten igleghteghngaaghmeng tekeghaq qemighyuk inga aliighaat, iiwen qemighyugmeng taagken mayughaqut, amaken yugemllu atunem. Atunem aliighutut. ‘As they were going, they were approaching a hill on a point; just as they were climbing the hill, a man at the same time was coming from the other side. They appeared to each other at the same time.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:124)"	атуным
atungak	pos	IPA	hide of sea mammal (especially bearded seal); bearded seal or other sea mammal skin before it is dried	"of bearded seal or female walrus, use for boat covering, as a mat, as boot-sole material, etc.; cf. atungaq; Atungagmeng aangelghiimeng, amsakaghtameng, iwhanimeng nateghqaqegkayuguyaghpetut. ‘Large, or small, bearded seal hides were used for making the soles of mukluks.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:98)"	атуңак
atungaq	pos	IPA	sole of boot	No information given.	атуңақ
atunraaq	pos	IPA	skin of a young bearded seal 	Chukotkan (R)	атунрāқ
atuq	pos	IPA	useful thing; thing being used; singing	"atii aatkat nutaghaagut ‘the clothes she is wearing are new’; ighneghma atii ulimghusit angagan tuunkaqii ‘the tools my son is using were given to him by his uncle’; Enkaangaam naqam enra-aq atuq taana, yupigem ataa igleghutaqeftaat salin. ‘And then there was singing, Eskimo singing, and they continued to do that.’ (PANGEGH. 21)"	атуқ
atuqe-	pos	IPA	to wear; to use	atuqaa ‘he wore it or used it ‘/	атуқы-
atuqumtaaq	pos	IPA	thing that is frequently used	No information given.	атуқумтāқ
atuun; atuuta	pos	IPA	Eskimo song	No information given.	"атӯн, атӯта"
Atuuylaap	pos	IPA	Venus; the Evening Star	apparently this is the only Yupik word that ends in p	Атӯӥля̄п
atwhay	pos	IPA	"oh yes, now I remember what it was I wanted to say"	"particle; atwhay aqfaaghhnaken puygukan ‘oh yes, would you please get that thing which you had forgotten’; Angyat entaqun atwhay kaatkaagutlu. Aghnalguutqun tawani tumighqaataqngamta maaken. ‘A boat probably arrived too, I remember. They had women there when we went across to Siberia.’ (PANGEGH. 32); Seghleghhalek elngaatall upughaat. Atalgukaghaa taana atwhaynguq nulighhituq. ‘How great, they were very hospitable to him. Oh yeah! It is said his cousin had no wife.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. III:33)"	атӱьаӥ
ava	pos	IPA	cyst	No information given.	ава
avaagh-	pos	IPA	"to be relieved of pain; to slacken (rain, snow, traffic); to diminish"	"Ineghteghngaatni mekelghiighhaam umyugaghhaagkeneng avaaghigalnguq aligatellgha naayghamun. ‘Even though they warned him against it, the little boy’s desire to go up the mountain never slackened.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 49)"	авāӷ-
avaaneghlluk	pos	IPA	persistent unrelieved pain	No information given.	авāныҳльюк
avagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > avaghqaghhiigute-, avamsuggaq, avaqraggiighute-, aviighute-"	аваӷ-
avaghniighqe-	pos	IPA	to smell good 	Chukotkan (R)	аваӷнӣҳқы-
avaghnite-	pos	IPA	to be fermented	No information given.	аваӷниты-
avaghqaghhiighute-	pos	IPA	for there to be nothing left	No information given.	аваҳқаҳӣӷуты-
avamsuggaq*	pos	IPA	nothing at all	No information given.	авамсюхақ
avamsuggiite-	pos	IPA	to be or have none; to be nothing at all	avamsuggiituq ‘there's none left at all’	авамсюхӣты-
Avan	pos	IPA	former village in Chukotka; East Head	see Map 2 in Appendices; see also Avatmiit	Аван
avangite-	pos	IPA	to lack something; to have none	"avangilnguq ‘one who doesn’t have something, or is lacking things in general’"	аваңиты-
avangunani	pos	IPA	without something; without having something; with nothing	Chukotkan (R)	аваңунани
avaqraggiighute-	pos	IPA	for there to be nothing left	No information given.	авақшахӣӷуты-
avaqutaghaq	pos	IPA	part of a skin boat (upper part of rib?)	No information given.	авақутаӷақ
avaqutaghllulghii	pos	IPA	a woman who gives birth only to children that die	No information given.	авақутаҳльюлӷӣ
avaqutalqusiq	pos	IPA	"child (offspring, approx. 3-10 years old)"	Chukotkan (V&E)	авақутальқусиқ
avaqutaq	pos	IPA	child (offspring)	avaqutanka ‘my children’; avaqutalguuq ‘he has children’; avaqutiituq ‘he has no children’	авақутақ
avaquti-	pos	IPA	to have a child; to give birth	avuqutiiq ‘she gave birth’	авақути-
avara-	pos	IPA	to keep one’s mind off something unpleasant; to comfort; to distract; to cheer up	"avaraaq ‘she kept her mind off something unpleasant’; iilqelghiit avaranaqumanginaghluteng pinightut ‘it is good to try to cheer up those who are depressed’; avaranaluki naghaaghtestaqluki pineghlliqelleghqiitneng ‘in order to distract them from going astray, let them play’; avarasqelluku laalighfikaa ‘she visited her to cheer her up’"	авара-
Avatmii(t) 	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Аватмӣ(т)
avayaq	pos	IPA	branch; prong on reindeer antler	No information given.	аваяқ
aveg-	pos	IPA	to divide; to halve	"avegtuq ‘it divided in two’; aavgaa ‘he divided it, split it’ / aavgutuq neqmeng ‘he cut off or separated some food for himself’; aavgutaa aghnaq ‘he divided in two, giving half to the woman’"	авыг-
avegtugh-	pos	IPA	to dice meat; to cut up meat into bite size pieces; to slice meat	avegtughtuq ‘he sliced up some meat’; avegtughaa ‘he sliced it up’ / 	авыхтуӷ-
avegtughaataq	pos	IPA	tobacco pouch	No information given.	авыхтуӷāтақ
avegtughaq	pos	IPA	tidbit of food; pipe tobacco	"Aghnam pimakanga, ""Ataasighhaq naasiiqaghhu."" Taagken mekelghiighem ataasiq avegtughaq neghumakanga. ‘The woman said to him, “Try one little bit.” And then the boy ate one tidbit of food.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 53)"	авыхтуӷақ
avek	pos	IPA	half	aavga ‘half of it’	авык
avelemki-1	pos	IPA	to become unconscious	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	авылымки-1
avelemki-2	pos	IPA	to rush; to bustle about	Chukotkan (R); ellnga avelemkiiquq angyaghpagmun ‘he is rushing to the ship’	авылымки-2
avelghagh-	pos	IPA	to not go to an event; to miss an event; to leave out; to not include; to avoid	"avelghaghtuq ‘he missed something, didn't go’; avelghaghaa ‘he left him alone, didn’t include him/it’ / avelghiigatut ‘they never missed the opportunity [to do something]’; Aghhunneghagu avelghaghpenateng navek piiqluteng. ‘Every day without missing an opportunity they would go out somewhere.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:244)"	авылӷаӷ-
avelghaqiinagh-	pos	IPA	to ignore	avelghaqiinaghaa ‘he ignored him or it’	авылӷақӣнаӷ-
avenagh-	pos	IPA	to be energetic; to be full of pep	avenaghtuq ‘he is full of pep’ /	авынаӷ-
avenaq	pos	IPA	energetic person	No information given.	авынақ
aveniqe-	pos	IPA	to rush; to be in a hurry; to act energetically	aveniquq ‘he is acting energetically’	авыниқы-
avenqaayuk	pos	IPA	fellow clan member	No information given.	авынқāюк
avenqaq	pos	IPA	partition; fellow clan member	No information given.	авынқақ
averngu-	pos	IPA	to distract or be distracted from one's problems or bad tendencies	avernguuq ‘he is distracting himself from his trouble or grief as by thinking about something else or keeping busy’; averngwaa (or averngustaa) ‘he is distracting him’ / seghletun pinaqelghiineng avaralghiit sameng pinilghiimeng pistaqluki llaaghanwha averngustaqiit nelliqelleghqiitneng ‘it is good to distract those who might do wrong by leading them toward something enjoyable’	авырңу-
aveyugsagh-	pos	IPA	to urge to hurry	Chukotkan (R); angyallightem aveyugsaghaqaa sivuyagta guutesqelluku ‘the captain is telling the front man to hurry up and shoot’	авыюхсаӷ-
avi-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root;  > aviigh-, aviite-, aviighute-"	ави-
avighaate-	pos	IPA	to have something keep coming to mind; to not be able to get thoughts out of one's mind; to be obsessed	"avighaatuq ‘he keeps thinking about something’; avighaataa ‘he keeps thinking about it, can't get it out of his mind’ / ilagaan aghnelqusiq avilghaatkumakanga ‘he thought about the song all day’"	авиӷāты-
avii-1	pos	IPA	to have a ringing in one's ears; to ring (of the ears)	"aviiguq ‘he has a ringing in his ears, his ears are ringing; it (ear) is ringing’"	авӣ-1
avii-2	pos	IPA	to signal (with a flag or with shouts)	yuggaq mangteghamun uuglluni aviiquuq ‘the man climbed to the roof of the house and shouted to announce something’	авӣ-2
aviigh-	pos	IPA	to wipe	aviightuq ‘he wiped something’; aviighaa ‘he wiped it’ / aviighusiq or aviighusqaq ‘wiping rag’	авӣӷ-
aviighute-	pos	IPA	to not be there anymore; to die; to disappear	Qilagwaaghllak aganlenguq aviighutuq. ‘The dark cloud over there disappeared’ (SLI JR. DICT. 38); Aghnaq aviighusimaaq. ‘The lady has passed away.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 38)	авӣӷуты-
aviilghwaaq	pos	IPA	cry of whale or bearded seal	No information given.	авӣлӷӱāқ
aviilleq	pos	IPA	absence	"aviillgha ‘its absence’; used in possessed localis, but with absolutive subject of underlying verb rather than with relative possessor: Yuuk aviilghani, iitghumalghii. ‘When the man was away, it hid.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 66)"	авӣльық
aviin	pos	IPA	song that women perfom when a whale has been caught	Chukotkan (R); cf. iviiq	авӣн
aviite-	pos	IPA	to be absent; to be gone; to not be here	aviituq ‘he or it is gone’ /	авӣты-
avlawa	pos	IPA	flour	"Akilpegaghniighluta apeghiighyamta, tent-a (tiinta), qawaagniikghusiq, suflugaq, egllu, avlawa, iingunaqaghtaan tukfightughaa sameng nuughyaghqaagpenanga, … ‘We traded and in the end he had bought a tent, shotgun, rifle, stove, and flour, so I would not lack anything, …’  (SIVUQAM. NANGAGH. 2:60); = evlawa"	авляӱа
avlegh-	pos	IPA	with legs spread; with parts which are joined at one end spread apart at the other end	"postural root; avleghtuq ‘he spread his legs’; avleghtaa ‘he spread its legs open’; avleghngaaq ‘he has his legs spread’; avleghngalghiik ‘an open pliers, scissors, etc.’"	авлыӷ-
avleghmete-	pos	IPA	to be bow-legged; to be spread apart widely (though attached at one end)	No information given.	авлыӷмыты-
avleqaghtaq	pos	IPA	bola	also used in the plural avleqaghtat for one bola	авлықаҳтақ
avleqaghte-	pos	IPA	to use a bola to try to catch	avleqaghtaa ‘she used a bola to catch it’ / avleqaghsimakanga ‘he did use a bola on it’	авлықаҳты-
Avrugaq	pos	IPA	site on Pungokosit Spit by Niyrakpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Авругақ
avugh-	pos	IPA	to sort; to sort out and set aside	"avughtuq ‘he sorted things, set some aside’; avughii ‘he sorted them, set them (or some of them) asid’e / avughyaghqat ‘things to be sorted’; avuutaa ‘he sorted things for her’"	авуӷ-
avun	pos	IPA	cause; excuse; reason behind something	avutnga ‘the cause of it’	авун
avuteghqe-	pos	IPA	to regret	avuteghquq ‘he regrets something’ / avuteghqutkaa ‘he regrets it’	авутыҳқы-
avutke-	pos	IPA	to blame	avutkaa ‘he blamed her’	авуткы-
avyaawi-	pos	IPA	to be careless; to be wasteful; to misuse things	avyaawiiq ‘he is being careless’ / avyaawiiqelghiit enkaam pituumangigalnguut ‘they misuse things and so they end up with nothing’	авья̄ӱи-
aw-	pos	IPA	over there	"obscured demonstrative base; only the demonstrative adverb forms exist and not any corresponding demonstrative pronoun forms; > awaliq, awani, awata, awatghute-, awatiigh-, awatmun, awavagh-, aawhkaghhaani, aawhkaghtaq, aawhkan, aawhkayaghaq;"	аӱ-
awakaghaani	pos	IPA	right on the other side of it; on the very next day	unaami awakaghaani ‘the day after tomorrow’	аӱакаӷāни
awakaghniimna	pos	IPA	the previous one; on the day before	Chukotkan (R); particle	аӱакаӷнимна
awaligh-	pos	IPA	to bring over food as a sign of friendship or if there is a need for food	awalightuq ‘he brought over food ‘/ cf. awa(ni)	аӱалиӷ-
awalighaq	pos	IPA	drifting ice outside of the pack ice	No information given.	аӱалиӷақ
awalighhaq	pos	IPA	the one right on the other side of something	No information given.	аӱалиҳақ
awalighneq	pos	IPA	the other side	awalighneghani ‘on the other side of it’	аӱалиӷнық
awaliisaq	pos	IPA	food or  other item brought over as a gift	Asagma awaliisaa neghsam neqanga gaaghaqa. ‘I cooked the seal meat my aunt brought over.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 39)	аӱалӣсяқ
awaliq	pos	IPA	the one on the other side	No information given.	аӱалиқ
awalmik	pos	IPA	husk (?)	"“Awalmiggaghmeng saghnaaqitek,"" piiqiinkut. Awalmiggaghmeng saghnaaqelghiikut. Taakwani sangwaat masugkwaaghhaat. Kaannemta estegmineng nusugluku uyghaggaq qateghrakegtaq, aghneghllak una awalmik peqaghhaat lliluki awalmiggaat taakut. ‘“Gather little husks,” he told us. We gathered little the little husks. Also, some sort of fibrous old roots. When we arrived he pulled from his pocket a little whitish stone, and all day he’d array the husks and tundra moss with the husks.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:146)"	аӱалмик
awani 	pos	IPA	over there at a distance	"demonstrative adverb, localis case; anaphoric localis adverb: taawani ‘there, over there at a distance’"	аӱани
awata	pos	IPA	area on the other side; last year	mangtegham awatangani (awatngani) ‘in the area on the other side of the house’; awatanganeng or awatnganeng ‘from the other side of it’; Awatangani mangteghaghput taaqegkaaguq. ‘Our house was finished last year.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 39)	аӱата
awataghpak	pos	IPA	sealskin float or poke	No information given.	аӱатаҳпак
awataghpawaaq	pos	IPA	cumulous cloud; acorn	Chukotkan (R)	аӱатаҳпаӱāқ
awataghpi-	pos	IPA	to make a sealskin float or poke	Neghsapigmeng unanglunga awataghpiiqa. ‘I caught a seal and made it into a poke.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 118)	аӱатаҳпи-
awatangani	pos	IPA	last year	particle	аӱатаңани
awatghute-	pos	IPA	to overshoot; to jump or otherwise pass over (it); to miss the mark by going over (it)	"awatghutuq ‘it missed the mark going over it’ awatghutaa ‘it went over it’ / neghsaq guutkani awatghutaa ‘he shot at the seal but the bullet went over it’; Milughyaqminigu -- milunghatni legan nalugutaqelghii ulaagha awatghulluku. ‘When she threw it at it, whenever she threw her woman’s-knife at it, she missed hitting it when the knife landed.’ (QATEP. 20)"	аӱатҳуты-
awatiigh-	pos	IPA	to lose something by its escaping	awatiightuq ‘he lost something’; awatiighaa ‘he lost it’ / awatiiqaq ‘one that escaped’; unkusenka awatiighumalghiit ‘my trap lost something when it escaped from the trap’	аӱатӣӷ-
awatiitek 	pos	IPA	twin looped anchor thong attached to flippers of a sealskin harpoon-line float	No information given.	аӱатӣтык
awatkaghtaq	pos	IPA	thing of last year; thing from the other side	No information given.	аӱаткаҳтақ
awatmiighte-	pos	IPA	to go farther away (especially of something drifting away)	No information given.	аӱатмӣҳты-
awatmun	pos	IPA	toward over there	particle	аӱатмун
awavagh-	pos	IPA	to move farther away; to drift out; to carry or take farther away; to calm down (of weather)	unaghsighhaq miluutkaqa qagim awavaataa ‘the wave caused the stick I threw to drift further out’; siku awavaghtuq ‘the ice drifted out’; umegneq awavaghaqaa ‘the snow storm is dying down’	аӱаваӷ-
awaziq	pos	IPA	relative (kin); fellow clan member	awaziqluku yimikumanghitaqa ‘since she is a relative I wasn’t shy with her’; awaziqluku ayuqan yiminiituq tukuqelleghqaa ‘since she is your relative you should feel at home when she’s your host’; cf. awa(ni)	аӱазиқ
awen	pos	IPA	usually; often; intermittently; frequently	"particle; awen tagiiquq ‘he usually comes’; Awen ungipaqaqanka laluramkenun nunivaget tuqusighaqniluki akmaagutakun. ‘I often tell the white people that we ferment the roseroot in a keg.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:90); Unangniilleq tamaana liilightuusaghllaguuq qayughllak awen peleghqutkegkayuk. ‘Hunting for game had many rules and regulations, because there were often mishaps that happened.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:130)"	аӱын
awenkullaq	pos	IPA	thing that has been used or kept for quite a while	No information given.	аӱынкульяқ
awenralae	pos	IPA	relative (kin); fellow clan member	kaaskuma awenralemninnaaaghtunga  ‘when I arrive I’ll stay with my relatives’	аӱынралаы
awergha	pos	IPA	valuable pelt; furbearer	"other than the usual red fox; Awergha allaghhiinaq yugem tukfighaa. ‘The man is buying all kinds of fur(s).’ (SLI JR. DICT. 40); Nunivak awerghatuuq. Qatelghiituuq, kaviipigtuuq, qenghaghtulguuq, amiklugtuuq, sikigtuuq. ‘The tundra has lots of furbearers. It has lots of white foxes, red foxes, blue foxes, weasels, and squirrels.’ (AANGHHAQ 73)"	аӱырӷа
awi-2	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > awillaghate-, awinqute-, awiqe-, awite-, awiyute-"	аӱи-2
"awi1, awii"	pos	IPA	is that so; now I see; now I realize	"particle;  awi kaasimaa? ‘she got here, didn’t she?’; awi kaasimaa! ‘oh, so she got here!’; Awi whangkutestun akuzing’gannikemken pikayuguziin. Whangkutestun awi ayuqsiin? ‘Oh, you could speak like us? I thought you were never able to do so. I didn’t know you were like us.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:3)"	"аӱи1, аӱӣ"
awiim	pos	IPA	probably	particle; also awiiman	аӱӣм
awiinawi	pos	IPA	so it's true	particle	аӱӣнаӱи
awillaghate-	pos	IPA	to leave the area together	awillaghatut ‘they all left the area together’	аӱильяӷāты-
awilleq	pos	IPA	probably	particle	аӱильық
awilleqa	pos	IPA	so that’s how it is!	"particle;  Awilleqa ellngingumalghiit sivumnnelnguut! ‘So, that was them in front of us!’ (SLI JR. DICT 40)"	аӱальықа
awinqute-	pos	IPA	to make room for something; to reduce the burden on something	"awinqutuq ‘he make room, reduced the burden’; awinqutaa ‘he made room by removing it’ / yuuk tagiyan awinqutuq ‘because the man came he made room’; qamiyek usitunaqngayek saghyani awinqutii ‘when the sled was going to have too much of a load he removed his stuff’; angayuqami qepghaghyaghqaan ilangi awinqunnaqneghmeng kayusiitaqii sayaghqiitneng ‘to reduce his parents’ work he helped them with some of it’; usitupigtusi waran whanga awinqunnaqunga ‘you all have too heavy a load so I’m going to get off’"	аӱинқуты-
awiqe-	pos	IPA	to take out of the way; to remove	Mallungunga ayveghmeng awiqutkamun qagim. ‘I found a dead walrus that had been uncovered by the waves.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 40)	аӱиқы-
awisu	pos	IPA	king salmon (Oncorhynchus tschawytscha)	No information given.	аӱисю
awite-	pos	IPA	to get out of the way; to take out of the way; to remove	"awituq ‘he got out of the way’; awitaa ‘he got it out of the way, he removed it’ / awillaghaatut ‘they all left the area’"	аӱиты-
awituwaq	pos	IPA	probably	"particle; aghnequn whaa kenghet qaamyaghqaniiqiit -- kii, awilleqa whaa aqlaghaghhnaqelghiikut ‘they say the electricity is supposed to go off later on today -- oh, so it will be cold in here then’; Sangamek kaamgegken aghipatak? Awituwaq yugneng allaneng ugiighaquten! ‘Why are your boots wet? Maybe you’re having an affair with another man!’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 9)"	аӱитуӱақ
awnepa	pos	IPA	probably; maybe; must be	particle; especially in reference to something one wishes were not so; =  agnepa	аӱныпа
awnisghwa	pos	IPA	large female ring seal (Phoca hispada)	Chukotkan (R)	аӱнисҳӱа
ay	pos	IPA	what did you say?; huh?                 	particle; = hay	аӥ
aya-	pos	IPA	to go far	Chukotkan (R)	ая-
ayaa-	pos	IPA	to become blind	"ayaaguq ‘he went blind’ / ayaamaaq or ayaangaaq ‘he is blind, has become blind’; iyem aqnighneghan ayaastaa ‘eye disease made him blind’"	ая̄-
ayaagte-	pos	IPA	to have difficulty going against the wind; to go against the wind with difficulty	ayaagtuq ‘he went against the wind’; aagken aygughyaghaq ayaaggnapigtuq ‘going against the strong wind from that direction is difficult’; ayaagtem aygumun sukangilliqukut ‘on account of the diffuculty in traveling north against the wind we suffered from going slowly’	ая̄хты-
ayaawaq	pos	IPA	blubber used in stove to make the firewood burn better and hotter	nangzeghaghmeng ayaawighpaglukek egllugni kumaghsaqminikek puqlaghqwaagaa ‘she put quite a bit of blubber in her stove when she lit it so it got quite warm’; eglluk uqumeng ayaawighaak quuget kumaragkiighesqelluki ‘she put some blubber in the stove so that the firewood could burn better’	ая̄ӱақ
ayag-	pos	IPA	to push off; to push away; to reject; to dislike	ayagtuq ‘he pushed himself away’; ayagaa ‘he pushed her or it away’ / Amik ayagluku uumgaqa. ‘I closed the door by pushing it.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 41)	аяг-
ayagagh-	pos	IPA	to train to develop strength; to lift weights	Chukotkan (R)	аягаӷ-
ayagaghte-	pos	IPA	to suddenly push off	ayagaghtuq ‘he pushed off’; ayagaghtaa ‘he pushed it away’/ yuggaq angyamelnguq sikumeng ayagaghtuq ‘the man in the boat pushed away from the ice’	аягаҳты-
ayagaq	pos	IPA	weight; barbell; rock for exercising	"Chukotkan (R, V&E); ayagaasiq ‘mittens or gloves used to lift weights’"	аягақ
ayagleghaq	pos	IPA	tiller for boat	No information given.	аяглыӷақ
ayagmigaq	pos	IPA	helm of boat	No information given.	аягмигақ
ayagsi-	pos	IPA	to get into position with the harpoon for striking; to aim harpoon at whale	ayagsiiq ‘he got into position with the harpoon for striking’ / sivuyagtengat ayagsighllaguuq ‘their striker (at the bow) is positioning the harpoon for the strike’	аяхси-
ayagsigh-	pos	IPA	to prop up; to support	amik pekuutameng ayagsighaa ‘he propped (open) the door with a shovel’; angyaq iggaggluku angwaaghutmeng ayagsiitkelluteng ayagsighaat ‘they propped up the boat leaning it against a paddle which they used as a support’; niillghek ayagsightughlukek aghnaq kiightiiq ‘after propping up the stretching frame the woman is splitting (a walrus hide)’; ayagsiin ‘something used as a prop or support’	аяхсиӷ-
ayagun	pos	IPA	push pole; wick adjuster for seal oil lamp; whale harpoon without explosives; pole for skin tent; internal pole of the traditional dome-shaped house	No information given.	аягун
ayagusiitaq	pos	IPA	center seal oil-lamp of the tent	Chukotkan (R)	аягусӣтақ
ayagutaq	pos	IPA	implement used to push boat away from ice or ice away from the boat; permanent support in a tent	kangqwaaghmi uunghameng ayagutaqluta angwaaghutmengllu alpagtukut ‘we passed through amid the small pieces of ice floating on the sea using as pushers harpoons and paddles’; angyalek qatmigmeng ayagutaqluni angyaq ayagaa ‘the captain pushed the boat off using a staff as a pushing device’	аягутақ
ayagyu	pos	IPA	temporary skin or canvas tent hung up inside a dwelling as a sleeping area to increase warmth at night	No information given.	аягью
ayak	pos	IPA	harpoon shaft; spear	No information given.	аяк
ayakagh-	pos	IPA	to intentionally singe food before eating it; to barbecue; to roast over a fire	ayakaghaa ‘he barbecued it’ / Qawaagmeng ayakaghluku neghtukut. ‘We ate a bird after roasting it over the fire.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 41)	аякаӷ-
ayakaqayuk	pos	IPA	lead (metal); solder	so called from its ease in being melted	аякақаюк
ayakigha-	pos	IPA	to travel (by boat) by pushing off from chunks of ice or pushing ice out of the way	kangqwaaq ayakighaaqluku alpagaghput ‘we passed through it pushing off from the chunks of ice’; ayakighalghiit ayallghitgun igleghtukut ‘we travel through the way where they had pushed the ice away’	аякиӷа-
ayakite-	pos	IPA	to suddenly hit barrier; to encounter a blast of wind	Sikukun ayakilluta kimaawiikut. ‘We ran into pack ice and lost time.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 41)	аякиты-
ayakmitagh-	pos	IPA	for wind to blow against it; for winds to blow against each other	anuqmi nalugnaqelghiikut ayakmitaghaakut ‘it was a little hard landing against the wind’	аякмитаӷ-
ayakutaq	pos	IPA	cheekbone; side of face	No information given.	аякутақ
ayallaghwaaq	pos	IPA	cutting board for use in skin sewing	No information given.	аяльяӷӱāқ
ayallaq	pos	IPA	object or person on which a shaman sits during his shamanistic activity for his flight	No information given.	аяльяқ
ayaniqe-	pos	IPA	to feel nostalgia	No information given.	аяниқы-
ayapegh-	pos	IPA	to lean on or with one's hand	ayapeghtuq ‘he leaned his hand on something’; ayapghaa ‘he leaned his hand on it’ /	аяпыӷ-
ayapghaataq	pos	IPA	mitten	ayapghaatagka ‘my mittens’	аяпгҳāтақ
ayapghun	pos	IPA	bone in forearm (either radius or ulna)	No information given.	аяпгҳун
ayaqighfik	pos	IPA	armrest	No information given.	аяқиҳфик
ayaqighte-	pos	IPA	to lean against something	ayaqightuq ‘he leaned against something’; ayaqightaa ‘he leaned it against something’ / Unaghsit kiinghesqelluki ayaqighqughanka uyghagkun. ‘I leaned the lumber against a rock for drying.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 42)	аяқиҳты-
ayaqighutaq	pos	IPA	backrest	No information given.	аяқиӷутақ
ayaviilek	pos	IPA	daddy-long-legs type of spider; grasshopper	No information given.	аявӣлык
ayaviiq	pos	IPA	cane; walking stick	No information given.	аявӣқ
ayaviiqulleq	pos	IPA	clapping of a bird’s wings on the ground	Chukotkan (R)	аявӣқульық
ayeme-	pos	IPA	to break relatively long thin object	"ayemuq ‘it broke’ / ayemtaa igaasiq ‘he broke the pencil’; igaasiq ayemtuq ‘the pencil got broken’; ayemneghlluk ‘firm, strong, unbreakable thing’"	аӥымы-
ayemkagh-	pos	IPA	to break; to break something off of (it)	ayemkaghaa ‘he broke it’; Savigma nuvuga ayemkaghaqa. ‘I broke the tip of my knife.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 126)	аӥымкаӷ-
ayemkaghaq	pos	IPA	homemade chewing gum	"made from oil drippings collected under seal oil lamp, or by slowly cooking seal or whale oil until thick; = ayungkaghaq"	аӥымкаӷақ
ayemqe-	pos	IPA	to break long thin object to pieces	ayemquq ‘it broke up’; ayemqaa ‘he broke it up’ / esnam tuvaa qagim ayemqaa ‘the waves broke up the shore ice’	аӥымқы-
ayemqugh-	pos	IPA	to break long thin object to pieces	ayemquq ‘it broke up’; ayemqaa ‘he broke it up’ /	аӥымқуӷ-
ayemqutek	pos	IPA	"field of jumbled pieces of wind-blown sea ice, weak in places, often near the shore and limiting travel and hunting; broken cake ice"	see item 8 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	аӥымқутык
ayemruugte-	pos	IPA	to exercise the legs by walking	ayumiq ayemruugta quunpeng atuqegkaqaat ‘long ago they always engaged in exercise-walking’; iiwleng ayemruugllni yugusiqegnaghtuq (or yugunqeggnaghtuq ?) ‘regular exercise leads to bodily health’	аӥымрӯхты-
ayengqeghraq	pos	IPA	snare for catching cormorants	No information given.	аӥыңқыӷрақ
ayepsugigh-	pos	IPA	to do something (e.g. fasten something) securely	asightekaghten ayepsugighluki pinaketen ‘do that which you’ve lashed together securely’; cf. ayepsugite-	аӥыпсюгиӷ-
ayepsugite-	pos	IPA	to be sturdy	ayepsugituq ‘it is sturdy’ / ayepsugilngughmeng qamislimaanga ‘I made a sled from sturdy material’; cf. ayepsugigh-	аӥыпсюгиты-
ayghigh-	pos	IPA	to be accustomed to something; to become set a certain way	"ayghightuq ‘he is accustomed to something’ / ayghiitkaa or ayghiitaa ‘he is accustomed to it or to her’; ayghiqaq ‘something or someone that has become set in a certain way’; Ayghiitaqa maani kiyaghtelleq. ‘I got used to living here.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 42); saaqwlimta qikmighaat ayghightuq whavek neghqenneghmeng ‘our neighbor’s puppy got used to coming here since we feed it’; tumet iqragngaghmeng ayghightut kumlanghem ughullgha maliglluku ‘the roads became crooked following the melting of the permafrost’; kii, weekend-enneghatni ayghiitkaa Nome-meng ‘gee, he got in the habit of going to Nome every weekend’"	аӥӷиӷ-
ayghuugh-	pos	IPA	to replace broken parts; to refurbish; to repair	"ayghuughaa ‘he refurbished it’ / qamiyegka ayemquqak ayghuughlukek atughlleqagka ‘I will use my sled after replacing the broken parts’; ayghuuqaghlutek ullghitak salin pinightuk ‘the snow machine is fine still, having had its broken parts replaced’"	аӥӷӯӷ-
aygugh-1	pos	IPA	to travel against the wind or into headwind	aygughtuq ‘he is going against the wind’ / ayguneghlliqaquq ‘he is having a hard time going into a headwind’; Anuqa aygughnapigtuq unaaq. ‘The(strong) wind made walking against it hard this morning.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 42)	аӥгуӷ-1
aygugh-2	pos	IPA	to go north	aygughtuq ‘he is going north’ / ‘Sikumeng taanegken ima ayguqaagukut. ‘We have been traveling north all the way from the ice out there.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 42); see also ayguq	аӥгуӷ-2
aygughara	pos	IPA	flock of birds heading north in the morning	No information given.	аӥгуӷара
aygughike-	pos	IPA	to doubt	aygughikaa ‘he doubts it’ /	аӥгуӷикы-
aygughitiqe-	pos	IPA	to be in doubt about something	aygughitiquq ‘he is in doubt’ /	аӥгуӷитиқы-
aygughniite-	pos	IPA	for there to be sea ice conditions making travel difficult 	"in particular for tlate fall or early winter sea ice to consist of ice chunks and freezing slush blown against shore or a larger field of ice, making travel difficult"	аӥгуӷнӣты-
aygughnin	pos	IPA	ice blown into a cake by wind against a southern shore	see item 9 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	аӥгуӷнин
ayguq	pos	IPA	north	ayguqliq ‘the one furthest north’; see also aygugh-2	аӥгуқ
aymaakae	pos	IPA	carcass; gunstock	unangsaghaqngameng aymaakelaghluki uniquumiit neqesgaghqaaluki ‘when they caught quite a few seals they kept some of the carcasses behind for trap bait’; aymaaka neghqutkaaluku tagitaqa ‘I brought the carcass for dog food’; aymaaka tagitkaqa nengighqaqa ‘I divided and distributed the carcass I brought back’; Suflugaqa aymaakengllaghaqa nutaghameng. ‘I made a new stock for my gun.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 43)	аӥмāкаы
aymalqae	pos	IPA	humerus; femur	No information given.	аӥмальқаы
Aymaramket	pos	IPA	a particular clan	originally from Chukotka; = Armaramket; singular is Aymaramka	Аӥмарамкыт
ayngalqiwa	pos	IPA	net made from reindeer sinew used to entrap fur-bearing animals	Chukotkan (R)	аӥңальқиӱа
ayngananga	pos	IPA	musical instrument; piano; phonograph	also used in the dual aynganangak for one instrument	аӥңанаңа
ayngananga-	pos	IPA	to play a musical instrument	Panika Santiyami aynganangastenguuq. ‘My daughter is the one who plays piano Sundays.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 43)	аӥңанаңа-
aynganghineq	pos	IPA	trap used for mountain sheep	Chukotkan (R)	аӥңанӷинық
ayngelin	pos	IPA	wall of ice formed along shore or shorefast ice	unsafe to pass through; may be used in the plural: ayngalitet; see item 10 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	аӥңылин
ayngughaq	pos	IPA	type of volcanic rock that floats	No information given.	аӥңуӷақ
ayngusi-	pos	IPA	to make chewing gum by cooking seal oil until very gummy	apparently the gummy oil is mixed with pussy willow catkins (?); ayngusiiq ‘he is making gum’ / cf. ayungkaghaq	аӥңуси-
ayngusiq	pos	IPA	pussy willow used in making chewing gum	apparently mixed with the cooked seal oil (?)	аӥңусиқ
aynguusik	pos	IPA	overalls made from seal skin	Chukotkan (R); used while butchering whales in water	аӥңӯсик
ayu-	pos	IPA	to progress; to continue; to keep on going	ayuuq ‘it continued’ /	аю-
ayughaayak	pos	IPA	herd of bull walrus on ice north of Gambell	ayughaayak uglaq esghaamayaqangat enraq sikughllaguftuq uplegvikelleghqameng ‘they saw a herd of bull walrus but there was too much ice around to go after them’; Tawani Pinaghvigmillu ayughaayak qawani piiqaat nani taakwani Tapghum ketanganillu. ‘In the month of June they would hunt bull walrus at their feeding grounds out from Tapghuq.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:136)	аюӷāяк
ayugigh-	pos	IPA	to tighten (screws and the like); to fasten more securely	ayugighaa ‘he tightened it’ / Angyaghput tengnnayukagu ayugighluku asightaqa. ‘I securely tied our boat so that it wouldn’t be blown away by the wind.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 43); cf. ayugite-	аюгиӷ-
ayugite-	pos	IPA	to be durable; to be sturdy	ayugituq ‘it is durable’ / cf. ayugigh-	аюгиты-
ayullaghqe-	pos	IPA	to not heal due to further aggrevation 	of a person or a wound; ayullaghqegkaq aga aghviisimaat ‘they took the one who didn’t heal across there (to the doctor or hospital)’	аюльяҳқы-
ayumightaq	pos	IPA	thing of long ago	Ayumightameng ungipameng nagasugaqunga. ‘I love to listen to the stories of long ago.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 43)	аюмиҳтақ
ayumiineq	pos	IPA	folktale narrator; storyteller	Chukotkan (R)	аюмӣнық
ayumiinneghaqu	pos	IPA	yearly; by end of the year	particle	аюмӣньыӷақу
ayumiq*	pos	IPA	long ago; year	cf. ayu-	аюмиқ
ayumiqulleq	pos	IPA	year	Ayumiqulleq tallima atughaghput tagitemnneng. ‘We have been here five years since we moved back.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 43)	аюмиқульық
ayumiqun	pos	IPA	next year	particle	аюмиқун
ayumiquyagu	pos	IPA	next year; the following year	particle	аюмиқуягу
ayungkaghaq	pos	IPA	homemade chewing gum 	"made from oil drippings collected under seal oil lamp, or by slowly cooking seal or whale oil until thick; cf. ayemkaghaq"	аюңкаӷақ
ayuqe-	pos	IPA	to be a certain way; to resemble; to be like 	tawaten ayuquq ‘it is like that’; ayuqaa ‘it is like it’ / ayuqut ‘they are alike’	аюқы-
ayuqesighagh-	pos	IPA	to mimic	ayuqesighaghtuq ‘he is mimicking someone’; ayuqesighaghaa ‘he is mimicking her’ /	аюқысиӷаӷ-
ayuqlightaq	pos	IPA	large boat used by mainland Alaskan Eskimos	Chukotkan	аюқльиҳтақ
Ayuqliq*	pos	IPA	mainland Alaskan Eskimo	No information given.	Аюқльиқ
ayuste-	pos	IPA	to go or cause to go very far	ayustuq ‘it went far’; ayustaa ‘he made it go far’ / miluutkani ayustaa ‘he made the thing he threw go very far’; angyaghhaat taaga ayustut ‘the boat out there went way far out’; qepghaqani ayustaa ‘he made his job last a long time’; kite-ni elngaatall quulmun ayustaa ‘he let his kite go way up’	аюсты-
ayuutqe-	pos	IPA	to have happened quite a while ago; to have gone too far	qikmighaq tuuftekaq qivghukluku unguvangnaqsaghluku siinenllu ayuutqumalghii ‘feeling bad over the puppy that choked he tried to revive it but it (the choking) had happened quite a while ago’	аю̄тқы-
ayva-	pos	IPA	to be ill	ayvaaq ‘he is ill /	аӥва-
ayvamiqe-	pos	IPA	to become exhausted from over-exertion; to be feel run down	ayvamiquq ‘he got exhausted’ / kilgaaquluni ayvamiquq ‘he ran a long distance and became exhausted’	аӥвамиқы-
ayvasaa-	pos	IPA	to feel ill	ayvasaaguq ‘he feels ill’ / qiighwqallghan ayvasaastaa ‘catching cold made him feel ill’	аӥвася̄-
ayveghagh-	pos	IPA	to catch walrus	No information given.	аӥвыӷаӷ-
Ayveghyaget 	pos	IPA	old village site on the east side of present-day Gambell	"see Map 7 in Appendices; plural; literally, ‘many walrus’; note that “Asveryagmiut” (i.e.,  Azveghyagmiut) is the Central Alaskan Yup’ik word for St. Lawrence Islanders"	Аӥвыӷьягыт
ayveliigh-	pos	IPA	to cook walrus	No information given.	аӥвылӣӷ-
ayveq	pos	IPA	walrus (Obodenus divergens)	No information given.	аӥвық
Ayvigteq1	pos	IPA	Aivichtik River and Camp Iveetok at its mouth on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Аӥвихтық1
Ayvigteq2	pos	IPA	site on the coast east of Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Аӥвихтық2
ayvii-	pos	IPA	to butcher walrus on the ice	No information given.	аӥвӣ-
Ayvikaan	pos	IPA	Ivekan Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Аӥвикāн
ayviquma	pos	IPA	female walrus with calf or calves	No information given.	аӥвиқума
aywaa	pos	IPA	north; north side; the north	"when inflecting, this word acts as the 3s-s possessed form of ayguq 'north' (q.v.), thus with non-absolutive endings in n (rather than m):  aywaaneng ‘from the north’ (literally, 'from its north'); Aywaanun tevyaghtunemni uteghtaqlunga. Aga aywaan esnenga aliinemkun uteghtaqunga tesamavek. 'Upon reaching the north side (of it) I'd turn back. When the shore of the (literally, its) north side became visible to me I would return down south.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:176); Aywaa aanguq. Aywaani nunam aatgha Chukotka. ‘The north is large. In the north the name of the land is Chukotka.’ (AANGHHAQ 12); however aywaa can also behave as a complete base in its own right: aywaa(gh)pik 'exactly north'; aywaaghmiit 'dwellers of the north'; (see also kellii, kilgaa, and uughqa)"	аӥӱā
aywaapik	pos	IPA	north	No information given.	аӥӱāпик
aywaaraawa	pos	IPA	reindeer parietal bone with antlers removed so that brain can be eaten 	No information given.	аӥӱāрāӱа
azi-	pos	IPA	to have an abundance of food and the like; to be able to get whatever one wants	upenghami aziluta neqmeng lliighaqukut ‘we have an abundance of food in the springtime’	ази-
azigughte-	pos	IPA	"to begin to warm up (of area, room, house, etc. with a source of heat)"	No information given.	азигуҳты-
azigutaq	pos	IPA	"shelter of rocks, snow, etc.; shield"	Anigumeng ikulunga azigutangllaghtunga. ‘I cut some snow blocks and made a shelter.’ (SLI. JR. DICT. 44)	азигутақ
azigutigh-	pos	IPA	to take shelter; to provide with shelter	No information given.	азигутиӷ-
eflegh- 	pos	IPA	"uncomfortable from wetness, stickiness, poorly fitting clothing, etc."	emotional root; efleghyugtuq ‘he feels discomfort from wetness or stickiness on his skin or from poorly fitting clothing or other discomfort on his skin’; efleghyukaa ‘he feels discomfort from it’; efleghnaghtuq ‘it causes discomfort’; efleghnaq ‘something that causes discomfort’; efleqetaq ‘person who tends to easily feels discomfort from wetness or the like’	ыфльыӷ-
efleghte-	pos	IPA	to drive away (especially animals)	"efleghtaa ‘it caused it to move away’ / angyat ayveghllagmun qungangiilluteng pegnem elfeghsimakangat ‘a boat came into the midst of a herd of walrus and with effort got it to finally move on’; igleghteghllagem saamllu tepem teghik qantaghanlenguq ukani efleghtaa ‘the constant motion and the odor drove away the wildlife that was nearby’; cf. eflegh-, eflequgh-"	ыфльыҳты-
eflequgh-	pos	IPA	to tell forcefully to leave; to expel	eflequghaa ‘he expelled her’ / eflequghiiq ‘he expelled someone’; cf. efleghte-	ыфльықуӷ-
eflugae	pos	IPA	floor	#NAME?	"ыфльюгаы,"
eflugaq	pos	IPA	floor	#NAME?	ыфльюгақ
eflugh- 	pos	IPA	to run one's hand or fingers over (it)	eflughaa ‘he ran his hand over it’ / eflughiiq ‘he ran his hand over something’; = uflugh-	ыфльюӷ-
eflughaagh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly run one's hand over (it); to feel	No information given.	ыфльюӷāӷ-
efqugh-	pos	IPA	pleased; satisfied	"emotional root;  efqughyugtuq ‘he is pleased with things, satisfied’; efqughyukaa or efquqaa ‘he is pleased with it’; efqughnaghtuq ‘it is satisfying’"	ыфқуӷ-
efqughute-	pos	IPA	"to do the right, appropriate or pleasing thing"	efqughutuq ‘he did the right thing for the situation’; efqughutaa ‘he did the right thing for it’ / efqughutegpenani or efqughutegpaan ‘(he) not doing the right thing’; elngaatall efqughutuq aghneghmeng pinilghiimeng igleghavigmeng ‘he was lucky to travel on such a good day’	ыфқуӷуты-
efsi-	pos	IPA	sick and tired of someone or something; rejecting; disliking	"emotional root; efsikaa ‘he is sick and tired of her or it, rejects or dislikes her or it, doesn't want to be with her’; efsinaghtuq ‘he makes one not want to be around him or it’; efsiyugtuq ‘he is sick and tired of someone or something’; saghnayughngaamki efsikanka ‘although I wanted to gather them, I rejected them’; efsikluki pinghitanka ‘feeling them to be not good enough I didn’t bother with them’; efsiyaguteghngaamkun saghnaaqa ‘even though I had come to not want it, I did pick it’; atkugegni aghighllagyayek efsiyagutaak ‘he grew to not feel comfortable with this parka because it got wet’; naghaalguteni mekelighiighhaam efsiyagutii unaaghhaaneng ellngitnilnguq ‘the little boy got tired of his playmates since he had been with them since morning’"	ыфси-
efsug-	pos	IPA	to shake or brush off dirt or snow	"efsugtuq ‘he is shaking himself off, brushing the dirt or snow off’; efsugaa ‘he is brushing the dirt or snow from her’; = ufsug-"	ыфсуг-
efsulqutaagh-	pos	IPA	to stall in sailing; to shake	the second meaning may be Chukotkan only	ыфсульқутаӷ-
efteghhilnguq*	pos	IPA	the solid component of sea mammal fat	#NAME?	ыфтыҳилңуқ
efteghilnguq*	pos	IPA	the solid component of sea mammal fat	#NAME?	ыфтыӷилңуқ
efteghruk	pos	IPA	"stem, hard, of a certain kelp"	species identification undetermined; this kelp is found on the shore of the south side of St. Lawrence Island	ыфтыӷрук
efteq	pos	IPA	liquid component of sea mammal fat	No information given.	ыфтық
eftullunaaq	pos	IPA	loud rumbling noise	No information given.	ыфтульюнāқ
eftuq	pos	IPA	sound of gunshot; deep popping sound	eftughuutuq ‘there is a sound like gunshot’; eftughtaghtuq ‘there are repeated gunshot-like sounds’	ыфтуқ
ege-	pos	IPA	to render	eguq or egaa ‘it rendered’/ egestaa ‘he rendered it’	ыгы-
Egeghaq	pos	IPA	former village on eastern side of Provideniia Bay near mouth of bay in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Ыгыӷақ
egge-	pos	IPA	to crimp boot soles with one’s teeth	"eggaa ‘he crimped it’ / eggelleqaqa ‘I will crimp it’; cf. ggii-, egga-"	ыхы-
eggegkaq	pos	IPA	"dish of finely minced fresh willow leaves, minced reindeer fat and fresh seal blood"	No information given.	ыхыхкақ
eggmagh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly bite; to bite on (it)	eggmaghaa ‘he repeatedly bit it’ /	ыхмаӷ-
eggmiigh-	pos	IPA	to hold something clamping it between upper and lower teeth	No information given.	ыхмьӣӷ-
eggmiiq	pos	IPA	thing held with teeth	Qawaagem iqallugaq eggmiiqluku tagitaa avaqutaminun. ‘The bird carried a tom cod in her mouth for her chicks.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 45)	ыхмӣқ
eggmillgha-	pos	IPA	to speak or simply vocalize in anger or contempt while clamping one's lower lip between one's teeth	eggmillghaaq ‘he vocalized this way’ / eggmillghataa ‘he vocalized this way at her’	ыхмильҳа-
eggneke-	pos	IPA	to go straight through without stopping	tesqawhken maavek eggnekumalghii ‘he came here straight from the northeast’; aghuliighpenaamta maavek eggnekukut ‘we came directly here without stopping’; eggnekfikaa ‘he went on to it without stopping’	ыхньықы-
eggngighteqe-	pos	IPA	to try to complete a task; to make an effort	ulimaani eggngightequtkaqeftaa taaqaghaghhnaluku ‘he was really trying to complete his carving in order to be finished with’; eggngighteqneghutmineng taaqutuq ‘he is finishing his work because of his general determination to complete tasks’; igaghyalleni eggngightequtkaa apeghiighaghhnaluku ‘he is determined to complete his schooling in order to finish with it’; cf. eggngiigmeng	ыхңьиҳтықы-
eggngiigmeng	pos	IPA	putting more effort into it	"particle  aghnam alangqughiitani ivaneghmeng aghtughluku iilqayagusaghluku eggngiigmeng alla ivanqigtaa ‘the woman, after finding that couldn’t  manage looking for her ring and was going to quit, looked for it again putting more effort into it’; ullghitak iilqayagullukek eggngiigmeng alla piyaqminikek igleghsimalghiik ‘after giving up on his snow-machine he put more effort into it, and it was moving’; cf. eggngighteqe-"	ыхңьӣгмың
eghhae	pos	IPA	"dermatitis; dry, flaky, whitish skin patch especially on the face"	#NAME?	ыҳаы
eghhe-	pos	IPA	"to have dermatitis; to have dry, flaky, whitish skin patches especially on the face"	kemgan nalighnegha eghlluni ayuqeftuq ‘part of his skin apparently looks like it has white patches on it’	ыҳы-
eghhunneghagu	pos	IPA	every day	"particle; literally, ‘whenever day comes upon it’;  eghhunneghagu igaghyaataqelghiit tawani aflumi ‘every day they go to school at the same time’; = aghhunneghagu"	ыҳуньыӷагу
eghhwaaqaghte-	pos	IPA	"to thrust into a hole; to thrust something into, or get something thrust into, one's throat"	eghhwaaqaghtuq ‘he got something thrust into his throat’; eghhwaaqaghtaa ‘he thrust something into his (another’s) throat’ / mekelghiighhaq eghhwaaqaghsimalghii alquutameng ‘the little boy accidently got a spoon thrust into his throat’; uyughani unaghsiighwaghmeng eghhwaaqaghtaa ‘he accidently thrust a stick into his brother's throat’	ыҳӱāқаҳты-
eghneq	pos	IPA	day; today	#NAME?	ыӷнық
eghqaalingite-	pos	IPA	to be thrifty; to not discard things; to not be wasteful	eghqaalingilnguq enkaam quunpeng sameng pilek ‘she does not discard things and so she always has something’; eghqaalingilnguq ‘thrifty person’	ыҳқāлиңиты-
eghqaaq	pos	IPA	red-throated loon (Gavia stellata)	No information given.	ыҳқāқ
eghqaataqe-	pos	IPA	to be spread out; to be scattered; to scatter; to discard many things at once	"eghqaataquq ‘it is spread out, he is sprawled out’; eghqaataqii ‘he discarded them’ / igalluget eghqaataqumakangi ‘he threw out the old books’; cf. egte-"	ыҳқāтақы-
eghqwaagh-	pos	IPA	to make an offering of food	"done in gratitude for nature's bounty, the rest of the food being distributed and eaten --  a traditional practice; cf. aghqe-1 "	ыҳқӱāӷ-
eghte-1	pos	IPA	to dawn; for day to break	"eghtuq ‘day broke, it is dawn’ / eghhutaa ‘dawn came on him’; qiighwqaangaaghmi eghhutaa ‘he woke up with a bad cold’; = aghte-"	ыҳты-1
eghte-2	pos	IPA	to recur; to happen again; to repeat	No information given.	ыҳты-2
Egkughaq	pos	IPA	site near Camp Collier (Kangii) before Southside River on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ыхкуӷақ
egkuq	pos	IPA	back of room or land area; headwaters of river; inland part	naayvam paga egkwaani utaqiigaqut ‘they are waiting at the inland end of the lake’; ingleghem egkwaani naniq ataasiq ‘at the far end of the room (bed) is  one seal oil lamp’; naayvaq egkughtaghput ‘we went by the far end of the lake’	ыхкуқ
egllipa	pos	IPA	Russian sourdough bread	"Aghhutanga tamaaghhan neqekrangllaghllaguftuq estugaghmeggnun, eghllipameng tamaaken. ‘Every day evidently he was busy making bread for their store, Russian sourdough bread.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:214)"	ыхльипа
"egllu, eglluk"	pos	IPA	stove	"dual, eglluk or egllugek, often used for one stove"	"ыхлью, ыхльюк"
egmigh-	pos	IPA	to rush by without stopping; to go all the way to one’s destination without stopping	egmightuq ‘he rushed by’ / egmiimalghiit aghuliiqaghpenateng ‘they passed by and didn't stop’; egmightesqughii aqfaatullghiit ‘he let the runners go by without having them stop’	ыгмиӷ-
egmightaataq	pos	IPA	"competition (in singing, wrestling, etc.); contest"	tughumghameng egmightaataallghiit aqelqam meklengiighem kayaalqumakangi ‘in the wrestling contest the visiting boy won’	ыгмиҳтāтақ
egmiinaq	pos	IPA	hurry up; quickly	particle; egmiinaq emta pilghaasi ‘please hurry up this time’	ыгмӣнақ
egnaangite-	pos	IPA	to be slow or slothful	egnaangituq ‘he is slow (habitually)’ /	ыгнāңиты-
egsuk	pos	IPA	upper part of animal hide near scalp	egsugakun petugluku megha sipegtaa ‘after fastening its (the hide’s) upper part she removed the water from it’; awataghpagkaq egsuganeng nayugyaghqaaguq ‘the sealskin that will be made into a float is to be skinned starting from its upper part’	ыхсюк
egte-	pos	IPA	to throw away	"egtaa ‘he threw it away’ / egtiiq ‘he threw something away’; egtutaa or eggutaa ‘he threw it away with the rest’, or ‘he threw something away for her’; egtigu ‘throw it away!’; cf. eghqaataqe-"	ыхты-
egtug-	pos	IPA	anxious	emotional root; egtugyugtuq ‘he is anxiously anticipating something’; egtugnaghtuq ‘it makes one anxious’; egtukaa or egtugyukaa ‘he is anxiously anticipating it’; egtugnaq ‘a cause of anxiety’; egtuketaq or egtugyuketaq ‘one who is anxious by nature’; egtugniquq ‘he is extremely anxious about something’; cf. egyug-	ыхтуг-
egtughyaq 	pos	IPA	legendary creature; lemming-like creature; sea-squirt-like creature	variously described as a sea-squirt or a lemming-like rodent with double claws; note that the Central Alaskan Yup’ik and Inupiaq cognates of this word mean 'mosquito'	ыхтуӷьяқ
egtugneq	pos	IPA	heartbeat; pulse	No information given.	ыхтугнық
egtugte-	pos	IPA	to have a pounding heart	egtugtuq ‘his heart is pounding’ / egtugneqegtaq ‘someone with a strong heart’	ыхтухты-
egtugute-1	pos	IPA	to get worried	"pennamun qantaghallilghii mughunniighta qawalghun esghaghluku egtugusimaaq ‘when the hunter was nearing the cliffs, he became worried seeing the numerous birds around him’"	ыхтугуты-1
egtugute-2	pos	IPA	to gather	Chukotkan (R); unaami taghtughyami egtugusimaa nunalgutetuqalgun pangeghhnaluni ‘in the morning when they awoke a group of neighbors gathered to make a trip to the other side (to St. Lawrence Is. from Chukotka)’	ыхтугуты-2
egyug-	pos	IPA	to act too soon without considering the consequences	egyugtuq ‘he acted too soon’ / egyugutaa ‘he acted on it too soon’; aghveq taawa egyugusimakangat aghveqluku ‘they harpooned the whale sooner than they should have’; egyugtuq nalugvigmun ‘ he went to the airport to early’; Ketmun egyugluta imaghlliightukut. ‘We went out too soon and ran into rough seas.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 45)	ыгьюг-
egzi	pos	IPA	scratched part of walrus hide; dandruff	amiiqiyughngaamteggu egzingapigtuq ‘although we wanted to make it into a whole hide (as for a boat skin) it had lots of scratches’; uvin’ga egziluni ayuquq ‘its hide seems to have lots of scratches’	ыгзи
egzinga-	pos	IPA	to be all scratched up (of walrus hide)	"egzingaaq ‘it is scratched up’ / amiiqiyughngaamgteggu egzingapigtuq ‘although we wanted to save the walrus hide for boat covering, it was very scratched up’"	ыгзиңа-
ellmaaghaghhaq*	pos	IPA	a little bit more	"particle; huuk, ellmaaghaghhaq sayugteggu angyaq ‘okay, pull the boat a little bit more’; cf. ellmaakwaaqun"	ыльмāӷаҳақ
ellmaakwaaqun	pos	IPA	at some later time	particle; ellmaakwaaqun pinakesi do it at some later time; cf. ellmaaghaghhaq	ыльмāкӱāқун
ellmaaragte-	pos	IPA	for wind to die down; for weather to clears up	"Ellmaaraggneghaninguq maaqneghem sukatepiglluki ayguutaqsaqangi. ‘Whenever the wind died down, it is said, the current would carry them quickly northwards.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:118)"	ыльмьāрахты-
ellmeng	pos	IPA	themselves	personal pronoun	ыльмьың
ellmi	pos	IPA	oneself	personal pronoun; Ivgamelluta nutaan maana quyngiq atghaghluni ellmineng tamaani ighniightughaquq uvikaghamnnillu. ‘We’d be at Ivgaq when the reindeer would come down on their own and give birth in our vicinity.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:98)	ыльмьи
ellmiga-	pos	IPA	to feel paranoid	nenglaallghiit entaqun ellmigastaat ‘maybe the ones laughing made him feel paranoid’; ellmigayugumapigtut ilangi ‘some people are so paranoid’	ыльмьига-
ellmigute-	pos	IPA	to become permanent or almost so (of stain or odor)	aghvikagka pegnem ghevestagka ellmigutkak ‘I finally removed the set-in stain when I washed it’; ellmigutfagilgakek aghvigkek ‘wash it before it (i.e. it stain) gets set’	ыльмьигуты-
ellmikaghti-	pos	IPA	to have one's words come back at one adversely	ellmikaghtiiq ‘what he said came back at him’	ыльмьикаҳти-
ellnga	pos	IPA	he; she	personal pronoun	ыльңа
ellngaan	pos	IPA	greasy residue from a seal oil lamp	ellngaatet tagneghqwaakayuguut ‘the residue in seal oil lamps become very dark’	ыльңьāн
ellngaasitaq	pos	IPA	container for catching lamp residue  (placed under oil lamp)	"ellngaasitaq tevnayukan niivigu ‘if it’s going to overflow, spill out the container for lamp residue’; Teghlam tuguluku ellngaasitaq, uugtuq uyghagmun, taagken kuuvaa ellngaasitaq. Maateghhaq meteghlluk tagneghtaa. ‘The owl took the container for sooty lamp residue, got up on the rock, and then poured out the containerful  (over the raven).’ (AANGHHAQ 28)"	ыльңьāситақ
ellngagh-	pos	IPA	to leak out liquid (as from hole in container)	ellngaghtuq ‘it is leaking out liquid’ / ellngaataa ‘it is leaking on him’; qaltam megha sukalluni ellngaghtuq ‘the water in the bucked leaked out fast’; naayvam ulevelleghllaga ellngaghraagumaaq ‘some of the water in the overflowing lake has drained out’; ellngaqayuk ‘leaky thing’	ыльңьаӷ-
ellngaghseketagh--	pos	IPA	to drain completely	mesiilghutak ellngagjhseketaghagka ‘I drained the oil container completely’	ыльңьаҳсыкытаӷ-
ellngaghseketaq	pos	IPA	drip catcher	mesiilghutak ellngalghiik ellngaghseketighlutek ayuquk ‘there is an open container under the stove oil reservoir to catch the drip’	ыльңьаҳсыкытақ
Ellngaghvik	pos	IPA	July	"literally, ‘time to leak out’; so called because of water coming out on the surface of the ground at this time of the year; also given in various sources as May, June, and May-June"	Ыльңьаӷвик
ellnginaq	pos	IPA	oneself (alone)	"ellnginaaguq ‘he is by himself’; ellnginaagunga ‘I am by myself’; this can also function in the quantifier/qualifier construction: Aghnaghaq taana ellnginaghhaan angayuqagkenka unilleqaak. ‘Her parents will leave only that girl behind.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:13); Iwerngaqun taawani Atayaghhaam guygungan nalighneghani Kuulunkut tawantut ellnginaghhaghmeng. ‘However there to one side or another of Atayaghhaq’s summer house  Kuulu and family alone were there.’ (SIVUQ. NANGEGH. 1:12); Sangavek agavek nemun agliigasin, ellnginaghhaghpek pellaghyugigasiin? ‘Why do you never go to a house over there ; aren’t you ever lonesome by yourself?’ (SIVUQ. NANGEGH. 2:266)"	ыльңинақ
ellngit	pos	IPA	they; them	personal pronoun) ellngitnituq ‘he is or has been with them’ (from ellngitni plus obsolete *etuq from  obsolete *ete- ‘to be’)	ыльңит
elngaatall	pos	IPA	very; very much	"particle; elngaatall aghitqumakanganga ‘I got very wet’; Uutqiiqaghluten elngaatall ketanqumeng takunaken qawawaangllaqan taana niinghusimaghpek, qesiqaamaan. ‘First go backward, then run very hard, approaching that figurine you made as you jump and as you spit at it.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:29); = enngaatall"	ылңāталь
elngaatatlu	pos	IPA	very much also	particle	ылңāтатлью
elpeg-	pos	IPA	being edgy; sensing something; being aware of something	emotional root; elpegyuglunga qikmit qilulghiit qineghsalghiinga qimugsiq kaataqeftuq ‘sensing something when the dogs were barking I looked outside and (saw that) a dog team was arriving’; elpekaa ‘he became aware of it’; elpekumakanga ighniyugniluku ‘he became aware that she was in labor’	ыльпыг-
elpegrightugh-	pos	IPA	to sense something	"sameng elpegrightughaqsiin? ‘what do you sense?’; elpekeraaghmelnguq sameng elpegrightughta? ‘what does he sense, that person who easily senses things?’"	ыльпыгриҳтуӷ-
elpek	pos	IPA	you (singular)	personal pronoun; elpetek ‘you (dual)’; elpesi ‘you (plural)’	ыльпык
elqegkaq	pos	IPA	sourdock; arctic dock (Rumex arcticus)	#NAME?	ыльқыхкақ
elqemsiighwagh-	pos	IPA	to be delirious; to doze lightly dreaming a little	elqemsiighwaghtuq ‘he is delirious’ / puqleghallghan elqemsiighwaghtestaa ‘his fever made him delirious’	ыльқымсӣӷӱаӷ-
elqiigh-	pos	IPA	to use one's hand as a sunshade; to put on a peak-cap or visor	elqiightuq ‘he’s using his hand as a sunshade’ / Apaka qaasqami angyanun elqiiqwaaquq. ‘My grandfather is shielding his eyes from the sun with his hand  in [watching] for boats from the beach.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 46)	ыльқӣӷ-
elqiilek	pos	IPA	bird type	exact identification undetermined	ыльқӣлык
Elqiilek	pos	IPA	second point on west coast south of Gambell; Nekeelit Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	"literally, ‘one with a visor’; see Map 4 in Appendices"	Ыльқӣлык
elqiiq	pos	IPA	visor	No information given.	ыльқӣқ
elqugh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > elqughaghte-, elqughtagh-, elqughute-, elqughutngagh-"	ыльқуӷ-
elqughaghte-	pos	IPA	to hit on the mark; to get (it) just right	"elqughaghtaa ‘he hit it right on the spot, got it just right’ / elqughaghutuq ‘he hit something, got something just right’; elqughaghsimakanga qawaak guutkani ‘he shot the duck right where he wanted to’; eltughaghma allgellgha elqughaghutuq whanga allgellellemnun ‘ my grandchild’s birthday came exactly on my birthday’"	ыльқуӷаҳты-
elqughtagh-	pos	IPA	to confront one concerning his accusations against you	elqughtaghtuq ‘he confronted someone’; elqughtaghaa ‘he confronted her’ /	ыльқуҳтаӷ-
elqughte-	pos	IPA	to tell the facts about something no matter how unpleasant they may be	elqughlluku pikanga enkaam sameng akinneghitaa ‘after he told the truth about her she didn’t answer back at all’; elqughlluku yuuk aapqangat igleghutipallginniluku ‘they were correct in saying that the man was not a very good leader’	ыльқуҳты-
elqughute-	pos	IPA	to do something right; to behave correctly	elqughutuq ‘he behaved correctly’ / elqughutegpenaninguq aghnaghaq quunpeng ‘all the time the girl was not doing what was right’	ыльқуӷуты-
elqughutngagh-	pos	IPA	to be lucky	Ullghitagka allgeghuteqaghtagka elqughutngalngiimeng tafsimeng. ‘For my wheeled/tracked vehicle I happened to get just the right belt.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 46)	ыльқуӷутңаӷ-
elquneghraak	pos	IPA	walrus skull	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, elquneghraagek, for one skull"	ыльқуныӷрāк
elquneq	pos	IPA	whale skull	"used in the dual, elqunghek, for one skull"	ыльқуның
elqunevraak	pos	IPA	walrus skull	"used in the dual, elqunevraagek, for one skull; Kaallukek elqunevraagek tallimineng pategyaqminikek uka leveklutun mekelghiighmun tagistaak. ‘When it got to the walrus skull and swatted it with its paw it sent it flying toward the boy with a whizzing sound.’ (SULUWET 97)"	ыльқунывпāк
elqwaapik	pos	IPA	palmated kelp	species identification undetermined	ыльқӱāпик
elqwaaq	pos	IPA	kelp (Laminaria sp.)	No information given.	ыльқӱāқ
elte-	pos	IPA	to leak air (out); to deflate	"eltuq ‘it leaked air, it deflated’ / eltestaa ‘he deflated it’; elsimaaq ‘it has deflated’; eltengngaaq ‘it is deflated’; = este-"	ыльты-
eltekeltagh-	pos	IPA	to giggle; to snicker	eltekeltaghtuq ‘he is giggling’ / yughaghvigmi aghnaghaat wasiwa eltekeltaghnaqlaataghtut Santimi ‘the girls are going to giggle in church once again this Sunday’	ыльтыкыльтаӷ-
eltugh-	pos	IPA	to be stuck; to be caught; to be unable to proceed	"eltughtuq ‘it got stuck, he can't go on’ / qamiskek yugem ugharrakun eltuumalghiik ‘the man's sled got stuck in the mud’"	ыльтуӷ-
eltughaq*	pos	IPA	grandchild	eltughaanka ‘my grandchildren’	ыльтуӷақ
eltughneq	pos	IPA	pile of chunks of sea ice extending down to ocean floor held there by weight of ice above water surface; pressure ridge stuck to bottom of sea	see item 11 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ыльтуӷнық
eltuqsaq	pos	IPA	obstruction of any sort	nuluusima uskughaa eltuqsalguuq ‘my fishing line has a knot that keeps it from unreeling’; umyugakek eltuqsalguuk yugem ‘the man had in mind a reason to disagree’	ыльтуқсяқ
em-may	pos	IPA	mother	Chukotkan (R); endearing form	ым-маӥ
emama	pos	IPA	child's word used when he/she wants to suck breast or bottle	No information given.	ымама
Emeghaq	pos	IPA	lagoon seaward of Mugum Peakon St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ымыӷақ
emgaari	pos	IPA	"foundation pole, usually whale rib, around the periphery of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	ымгāри
emsighqe-	pos	IPA	to mend by sewing	Chukotkan; amsighqe-	ымсиҳқы-
emta	pos	IPA	this time act differently; for a change; instead; again	"particle; used with negative commands;  emta muluughpenang ‘don’t be late this time’; igaqigu aatghen emta anglipafqaan ‘write your name but don’t make it big this time’; emta sukalluten ‘this time be fast’; Navek yugsughangigalnguut. Emta tawaten piluteng, piyaalluteng, emta yugsughagpenateng piyaaluteng tuvaq naamiglluku, uteghmun qiivyalghiimeng, uyughaat aviituq. ‘They don’t look around anywhere. Again they went like that, went hunting on the ice, again not looking around going all the way through the shore-fast ice. When they looked back, their brother was missing.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:12); Whaanguq aghnaghaam pii aghnalqwaaq taawna, “Emta pigpenaan, nelliqutkegpenaan ugiknaqaqangam taana. Emta avelghaghhu nelliqutkegpenaan.” ‘They said, now the girl said to the old woman over by the door, “Don’t do anything to him again, don’t mess with him. I am going to have him as a husband. This time leave him alone, don’t mess with him.”’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:5)"	ымта
emuri	pos	IPA	fish guts which are in a dugout or used to feed dogs	questioned	ымури
emyugak	pos	IPA	Adam’s Apple	Chukotkan (R)	ымьюгак
en-nanaayuq	pos	IPA	maybe; perhaps	Chukotkan (R); exclamatory particle	ын-нанāюк
enaangaay	pos	IPA	mother	endearing vocative form used in stories; cf. naa	ынāңāӥ
enan	pos	IPA	and then; and further; later on; when better conditions prevail	"particle; Sagiqegkan pinaken, “Enan unaami ungipaannaghamken”. If he persists, just respond to him, “It would be best if later on -- I’ll tell you tomorrow.”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 12)"	ынан
enanaayuk	pos	IPA	it is anticipated that	particle; enanaayuk upenghaqun ayveq kaallequq ‘one anticipates that in the coming spring walrus will arrive’; enanaayuk aghvengegkata mangtagtuullequsi ‘it is anticipted that you together will eat muktuk when they catch a whale’	ынанāюк
enankin	pos	IPA	let other(s) do it because they are better able to; doubtlessly; certainly	"particle; enankin aghulallget aghulaaghllit ‘let the ones dance who know how to dance better’; Avaqutaghhaanka neghesqelluki neqellgaanayukavek enankin, aagvikamken. 'In order to let my dear children eat, in case you have food (as you certainly must), I come by here.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:232); Aghnaghaq piyugumalghii enkaam uyughani pimakanga, “Enankin yugulghiiten. Inglukusagusaghqaaghsimaaten yulgutevnun.” ‘The girl walked, then said to her brother, “Without doubt you are a man. You are to be an opponent of your fellow men.”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 160)"	ынанкин
enankinam 	pos	IPA	"oh no, not again!"	"particle; enankinam aghnaghaq qiyanaqlaataghtuq ‘oh no, the girl is crying again’"	ынанкинам
enankinamllu	pos	IPA	outrageous	particle; enankinamllu saam tugumaak mesiighek ‘how outrageous that someone took the fuel oil’	ынанкинамлью
enekiitek	pos	IPA	"well maybe, as a matter of fact; if I do something; if perchance"	particle; = inekiitek	ыныкӣтык
eng	pos	IPA	now; next	"particle;  Eng, estu, sayugnaanghitamken meghmun aatqaghtekuvek! ‘Now, you slide, (however) I won’t pull you out when you plunge into the water!’ (KALLAG. 19); = heng"	ың
enkaam	pos	IPA	then (in temporal sequence); furthermore; and; also	"particle: whavek llinaqaqa igan, enkaam aanaqegkuvek tugunaken ‘I'll put your paper there, then when you leave, take it’; Taagken tapghaghhaghmeng ivaghimalghii. Naalkusami unaghsighwaaghem iqugakun petugumakanga. Enkaam asinganun uyghaggaq petugumakanga. ‘Then he looked for a child. When he found one, he tied it to the end of a stick. And then he tied a rock under it.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 19); Nenglum ulimallghanun nuughtuutkaagunga. Nallukanka enkaam. ‘I missed out on the building of the underground houses. So I don’t know about them.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:10)"	ынкāм
enkaamllu	pos	IPA	and also	particle	ынкāмлью
enkaamngam	pos	IPA	and then again	"particle; also: enkaamall, enkaamanngam, enkaaangam, enkaamam"	ынкāмңам
enleg-	pos	IPA	attached or fastened to something secure	postural root: enlegtaa ‘he attached it’; tapghaam iquga uyghagkun enlegngaaq ‘the end of the rope is attached to the rock to secure it’	ынлыг-
enlegkutaq	pos	IPA	log towed by reindeer (used in training)	No information given.	ынлыхкутақ
enlek	pos	IPA	foundation; main part	cf. nae	ынлык
enmis 	pos	IPA	already (surprising though it may seem); unexpectedly; even	"particle;  enmis taaqumii ‘what do you know, he's already completed it!’; Apasengaqruggaq pika qavaasightughluni ayagusitam saaghwani nekeghqengngwaaqruglughluni enmis. Sivumnni taglaqat. ‘That good old Apassengaq is already settled in pajamas up there by a support pole (of the house). They went before us.’ (PANGEGH. 31); Yulguluku enmis angukaqaat Sikneq ukegkut kinguliit. Yulguftughnguq tamaanii yugitelleghllagem entaqun natangani yulguyaghtuq enmis ingutughhaghmenguq paaghqiisan yupagiisan aghvengaghtaqut tagtalmi, Sikneghmi. ‘These last ones have even seen Sikneq with people living there. They say there were people back then maybe sometime around the plague. They even caught some yearling whales once in a while when there started not to be many people at Sikneq.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:22)"	ынмис
enngaatall	pos	IPA	very; very much.	"Chukotkan; particle; Ukavek tukughqaghhalegnun ivaghingukung nani inqun pinitun kiyaghhnalutung. Qayughllak nunamnni seghletun kiyaghlleghhiikung. Umiilegput enngaatall seghlepiguuq. ‘We have come this way looking for a host so we can live a better life somewhere, because in our village we have lived harshly. Our chief is really terrible.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 36); Atqaghlluni aywaanun sinumun ivgaghiluni tuguluki neqmun iguquusiq quyngim kelpanga napaghsimakanga. Aleghquumaan, “Enngaatall elpek sumeghneghpetun salukimi uguqnam ilunganilnguut nusugraghaqsiki?” ‘She went quickly to the pantry on the northern side and looked around, and took a reindeer antler piece that is used for taking food out of a pot and placed it upright. She said to it, “In your great thought, what is it that you do to extract food from inside hot things?”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 85-86); = elngaatall"	ынңāталь
enraq	pos	IPA	but; yet; still; however	"particle; has the implication that this condition will cause a change in plans or expected outcome; aanaqsaghtunga enraq eslalluguftuq ‘I was going to go outside but it is raining’; qamiyek naavlutek, enraqlu usighllagulghiik ‘the sled broke down, but it was heavily loaded also’; taginaqniyaghluni enraqlu aghviimalghii ‘after saying that he was coming here he crossed over (to the mainland) instead’; enraqlu akuuraalluteng tengkayuget kaatut ‘however the airplane also came at the time’; Taagken qateghyiighaghhaam mengteghaq meghqun llikestaamakanga. Qamanguq yugem pimakanga nuliini, “Uu-ugg naken enraq meghem iteghtinkut? Enta qiinqaa!” ‘Then the little bird started bringing the house to the water. Inside, the man said to his wife, “Nasty! However, where is the water coming in from? Go take a peek outside!”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 148)"	ынрақ
enta	pos	IPA	"come on; let's do it; well, let's go; excuse me (but, ...)"	"particle; used when one has finished talking or when one is leaving; enta suka ‘come on hurry’; Upughluni aghnaq kiwanguq qiifqaghtellegaghluni piiwaragkiighluni amigmun, piinguq esghaghluku, “Enta aanaqunga, enta aanaqunga,” alingepiglluni pimakanga. ‘The woman was startled in the back of the house and turned around and went quickly toward the door and said to him after seeing him, “Excuse me I am leaving, Excuse me I am leaving,” she said fearfully.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:6); Seghleghhalek aqiiyak. Enta tagi. Tagi neghyaghtuultung. Taakwna avelghaghluku legan. Nallukaaten. ‘Oh boy, a traveler. Now, come. Come, let’s go eat. Just don’t mind those on your way. They don’t know you.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. III:3)"	ынта
entaa	pos	IPA	excuse me; let me see	"particele; entaa naghughtestaghtinga ‘excuse me, let me by’"	ынтā
entaaghangam	pos	IPA	enough already!	particle	ынтāӷаңам
entami	pos	IPA	"well, let's see"	particle; entami esghaqaghlakun ‘could I just see it’; entamimii naaki iiggat tagivaghyaghqaghten ‘come on let me see the gloves that you are going to give me’	ынтами
entaqun	pos	IPA	maybe; perhaps; probably	"particle; entaqun eslallugughhnaqaa ‘maybe it will rain’; Kii, tanqiq a-a-a piituq. Qilawaaq allatmun igleghtuq. Entaqun anuqa nuuggnaquq. ‘Oh, the moon has risen. The clouds are heading in a different direction. Maybe the wind is going to be from a different direction.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:3); Sumemni taakut Siqlugaghyagmiit entaqun 200-300 years-ngut. I think that the Siqlugaghyak group is probably 200-300 years.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:4)"	ынтақун
epalgen	pos	IPA	layer of thickened fat in broth	Chukotkan (R)	ыпалгын
epe-	pos	IPA	to become stale; to become flat-tasting	epuq or epaa ‘it has lost its taste and odor’; Nefkuuraq epumakanga eslametepagllagem. ‘Being outside too long has made the dried meat lose its flavor.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 47)	ыпы-
epesigh-	pos	IPA	to smother or suffocate; to air out	"epesiimayaghaat qaangha melluluku uglaalluku ‘they tried to smother him plugging his mouth completely’; epesighluku pekaghtevziimaa ‘after they tried to smother him he let him gasp only a little more’; uygaaq episighaqa aviituq ‘the bleached, dehaired sealskin which I put to air out has  disappeared’"	ыпысиӷ-
esakemna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under sakemna	ысякымнп
esamna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  saamna	ысямна
esavghagh-	pos	IPA	to move boat on sea ice using small sled	esavghaghtut ‘they are moving a boat’; esavghaghaat ‘they are moving it’ / = isavghagh-	ысявӷаӷ-
esavghaq	pos	IPA	person moving a boat on sea ice using a small sled	#NAME?	ысявӷақ
esavghaq	pos	IPA	sled used to haul a boat on the ice	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, esavghak, for a single sled"	ысавӷақ
esgha	pos	IPA	look!; look here!; see here!; consider	"particle; esgha taana aglaghyulghii ‘look, this person wants to go home’;  Whangkutaqun malikruutaghtaqunga mekestaanghitgun tamaakutgun piightaqukut. Esgha tamaakut uyghaget aangepigtaqut, Neghqutemnguq tagitkaqaqii. ‘You see, we would play along with the smaller ones every now and then. See, those rocks are really big, they say Neghqun brought them there.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:12); Pineghmegteki, naghuyamenguq atkugpagulluteng. Esgha Tuliinkut nalighneghit maaten entaqun Kiwatangaghmiit. ‘They would have seagull skin parkas. Consider the Toolie family, part of them are probably from the Kiwatangaghmiit clan.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:24) "	ысҳа
esghagh-	pos	IPA	to open one's eyes; to see	esghaghtuq ‘he opened his eyes’; esghaghaa ‘he sees or saw it’ / esghaatuq ‘he saw something’; esghaatutuk ‘they2 saw each other’; esghaghlleqamken ‘I'll see you’; esghaghaa pinitun kiyaghtaalleq ‘he saw the need to change to a better way of life’	ысҳаӷ-
esghaghhu	pos	IPA	look!; consider!	"particle; Tughneghaanghituq. Tughneghaayaquni nunameng ghhataghnganayaghtuq.  Yuguuq. Sangwaa ikfiqa. Esghaghhu ikfiqeghllak sangwaa whaa mangteghamnneng naalkusimaq. ‘He is not a spirit. If he were to be a spirit, he would be floating in the air. He is a person. What is in pain? You see, something that is in dreadful pain is found at our house.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:5); Ayveghaghluteng wallu maklaglluteng, qilunganeng entaqun ighneghllungllaghluteng, aatkameng kiighakun whaten qenleghwaaghluteng pimalghiit. Anigumeng, peghqinepigumaat esgha taagnaput, esghaghhu anigumeng imighluki yugusimegteggun mengllaghyagutut. ‘They caught a walrus or bearded seal and made a container from its intestines and placed it between their clothing and body stretched across the chest. They apparently used snow to make water, you see our ancestors were quite smart.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:118)"	ысҳаҳу
esghaghlaataqu-	pos	IPA	to ignore the wishes of another because one can do so	igaghyat apeghtughiteyeng esghaghlaataqwaat pineghlliquteghllaguut ‘the students are taking advantage of their teacher by being disobedient’;  mekelghiighhaat uyuqlightaghteng iighhwaangesimaat esghaghlaataqum ‘the boys made their younger brother fume with rage on account of (their) ignoring (his) wishes’	ысҳаӷля̄тақу-
esghaghlaataqu-	pos	IPA	to look down on and act accordingly	igaghyat apeghtughisteyeng aghyuutiilnguq esghaghlaataqwaat ‘the students disrespect their humble teacher’	ысҳаӷля̄тақу-
esghaghte-	pos	IPA	to show	esghaghtaa ‘he showed him something’ /	ысҳаҳты-
esghaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to take a good look at (the target)	"ayveq esghaghtughluku guusaqminigu leganqun ifkaghtaa ‘after taking a good look at the walrus, when he had shot at it, he (saw that he) dropped (i.e., killed) it’; aghveq esghaghtughluku aghveqaa ‘after he took a good look at the whale he harpooned it (i.e., got it as his whale)’"	ысҳаҳтуӷ-
esghaghwaagh-1	pos	IPA	to look carefully at something	No information given.	ысҳаӷӱāӷ-1
esghaghwaagh-2	pos	IPA	to have visions; to have hallucinations	No information given.	ысҳаӷӱāӷ-2
esghalluug-	pos	IPA	to angrily look at someone 	No information given.	ысҳалью̄г-
esghapag-	pos	IPA	to watch; to look at	esghapagtuq ‘he's watching something’; esghapagaa ‘he's looking at it’ /	ысҳапаг-
esghapagsagh-	pos	IPA	to show off	No information given.	ысҳапахсяӷ-
esghapagsaq	pos	IPA	show; concert; performance	Chukotkan (R)	ысҳапахсяқ
esghapiqu-	pos	IPA	to look or act haughty or arrogant	Chukotkan (R)	ысҳапиқу-
esghaqaaluni	pos	IPA	it appears  that …; one sees	"effectively a particle; Kukulek teskiwna maaken esghaqaaluni, legan napaqam uliwaaghluni ayuquq. 'When you looked out toward Kukulek from here, you could see posts all over the place' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:160); Qiighqaq esghaqaaluni llangaqa qetkaq inglupigaghmeng iiggmeng, enkaam aatqaa Sivuqaq, Ulimaghistem sivuqaa. 'The shape of the island looks as if it were squeezed or wrung out with one hand. So that is why it is called Sivuqaq, a word that means something ""squeezed"" and formed by the Creator.' (KALLAG. 8); Taagken mekelghiiq piniighqwaamakanga. Esghaqaaluni nukalpigaq, pinighhalek! 'Then the boy came out in the pink of health. He turned out to be a handsome young man.' (KALLAG. 57)"	ысҳақāлюни
esghaqagh-	pos	IPA	to glance at; to open one's eyes briefly	esghaqaghtuq ‘he opened his eyes briefly’; esghaqaghaa ‘he glanced at it’ / esghaqaatuk ‘they2 glanced at each other;’ esghaqaghniighutuq ‘he cannot see any distance (because of the bad weather)’	ысҳақаӷ-
esghaqu-	pos	IPA	to look around now and then for (it)	uzimun esghaquuq qikmiq esghaqwaa esnami ‘he looked around for the dog on the beach’	ысҳақу-
esghavyu	pos	IPA	grey dog; grey color	No information given.	ысҳавью
esiqaghte- 	pos	IPA	to splash	esiqaghtuq ‘he splashed’; esiqaghtaa ‘he splashed her’ / = isiqaghte-	ысиқаҳты-
esiqghute-	pos	IPA	to toss out liquid	No information given.	ысиқҳуты-
esiqghuute-	pos	IPA	to splash when hitting the water hard	No information given.	ысиқҳӯты-
eskana	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under kaana	ыскана
eskiitae	pos	IPA	ice skate	eskiitek ‘a pair of skates’; also used in Chukotka	ыскӣтаы
eskiitiinga-	pos	IPA	to ice-skate	eskiitiingaaq ‘he is skating’	ыскӣтӣңа-
eskiwna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under kiiwna	ыскиӱна
esla	pos	IPA	weather; awareness; consciousness; world; outdoors	"eslami ‘outside’,  ‘in the outdoors’ "	ыслья
eslaaghlleq	pos	IPA	shorefast ice that has blown loose from where it was fixed due to a strong wind	see item 12 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ыслья̄ҳльық
eslaghllak	pos	IPA	the world; the universe; the great outdoors; the power of weather and nature	No information given.	ысльяҳльяк
eslakeraagh-	pos	IPA	to hesitate due to bad weather	tengegkayuget eslakeraaghaqut tagiyughngaaghmeng ‘the airplane hesitates to come due to bad weather’	ысльякырāӷ-
eslakeraq	pos	IPA	light rain; drizzle	No information given.	ысльякырақ
eslallekerghagh-	pos	IPA	to rain only a little	No information given.	ысльяльыкыраӷ-
eslallugughte-	pos	IPA	to rain	eslallugughtaa ‘it is raining’ /	ысльяльюгуҳты-
eslalluk	pos	IPA	rain	No information given.	ысльяльюк
eslalluuk	pos	IPA	bad weather; storm	No information given.	ысльялью̄к
eslaneghsite-	pos	IPA	to improve the weather through shamanism	Chukotkan (R)	сляныҳситы-
eslaniighta	pos	IPA	weatherman	No information given.	ысльянӣҳта
eslasugnite-	pos	IPA	to be sky-blue	eslasugnituq ‘it is sky-blue’ /	ысльясюгниты-
eslasuusik 	pos	IPA	barometer	No information given.	ысльясю̄сик
"eslata, eslataq"	pos	IPA	area outside or around (it)	eslatngani or eslatangani ‘in the area around it’; estek kakitaa eslataakun qiipaghaam ‘she sewed a pocket on the outside of the snowshirt’; mangtegham eslataaneng kameraagha naalkaa ‘she found his shoe outside of the house’	"ысльята, ысльятақ"
eslege-	pos	IPA	to be stout; thick in diameter	esleguq ‘it is stout’ / eslegellequq ‘it will be stout’	ысльыгы-
esleghyu	pos	IPA	oblong or cylindrical shaped rock	No information given.	ысльыӷью
esleqe-	pos	IPA	to fill up full ; to become full (of the moon)	eslequq ‘it filled up’; esleqaa ‘he filled it full’ / tanqiq eslequq ‘the moon became full’; gaaghusiq esleqaqa ‘I filled the pot’	ысльықы-
esleqnga-	pos	IPA	to be full; to be full (of the moon)	esleqngaaq ‘it is full’ / tanqiq esleqngaaq ‘the moon is full	ыслықңьа-
eslequq	pos	IPA	rear flipper of seal or walrus	ayveghem esleqghwi ‘walrus flippers’	ысльықуқ
eslevagaq	pos	IPA	dish of fish eggs and seal oil whipped together	No information given.	ысльывагақ
eslevak	pos	IPA	roe; fish egg; vagina	eslevaget ‘fish eggs’; other Eskimo languages also use the word for ‘fish eggs’ as a term for ‘vagina’ 	ысльывак
esliga-	pos	IPA	awkward; out of place	"emotional root;  esliganaghtuq ‘it makes one feel awkward or out of place’; esligayagutuq ‘he has come to feel awkward or out of place’; esligayugtuq ‘he feels awkward or out of place’; aatkani esligayagutii ‘he came to feel awkward about his clothes’; esligayugluni qavaghyaghtullghitughnguq ‘feeling awkward he did not go over to sleep there, it is said’"	ысльига-
eslugh-	pos	IPA	to go south; to travel with the wind	eslughtuq ‘he is going south’  / esluutaa ‘he took it south with him’	ысльюӷ-
esnae	pos	IPA	border; edge; shore	"naayvam esnengani ‘on the shore of the lake’; meghem esnengani ‘on the shore of the sea’; used possessed, for use unpossessed see esnaq"	ысньаы
esnaghtaq	pos	IPA	round smooth rock found on beach	No information given.	ысньаҳтақ
esnaq	pos	IPA	shore	"esnami ‘on the shore’; esnameng ‘from the shore’; esnakun ‘to the shore’; used unpossessed, for use with possessor see esnae"	ысньақ
Esneghak	pos	IPA	channel connecting Niyrakpak (Naayvaghpak) Lagoon to ocean on St. Larence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ысньыӷак
Esneghak 	pos	IPA	lagoon near Nasqaq on St. Lawrence Island	No information given.	Ысньыӷак
esneghaq	pos	IPA	lagoon opening to the sea	"used in the dual, esneghak, for one lagoon"	ысньыӷақ
esneghruk	pos	IPA	the very edge	No information given.	ысныӷрук
esnegrakegte-	pos	IPA	to be very dark in color	No information given.	ысньыгракыхты-
esnegrukegtaq	pos	IPA	something vividly dark red; something purplish	No information given.	ысньыгрукыхтақ
esnek	pos	IPA	bruise	No information given.	ысньык
esnekegtaq	pos	IPA	reindeer skin	Chukotkan	сныкыхтақ
esnelaaghun	pos	IPA	trimming	No information given.	ыснылāӷун
esneli-	pos	IPA	to prepare edge of walrus skin for splitting	esneliiq ‘she is preparing the edge of a skin’; esnelii ‘she is preparing the edge of it’ /	ысньыли-
esnevagh-	pos	IPA	to approach the coast from the sea	No information given.	ысньываӷ-
esneyaaq	pos	IPA	purplish thing	No information given.	ысньыя̄қ
esni-	pos	IPA	to prepare edge of walrus skin for splitting	esniiq ‘she is preparing the edge of a skin’; esnii ‘she is preparing the edge of it’ /	ысньи-
esnigh-	pos	IPA	to bruise	"esnightuq ‘he got bruised’; esnighaa ‘he bruised her, it’ /"	ысньиӷ-
esnighagh-	pos	IPA	to squirt; to flow out forcefully	"meghtaghvigem maaqviga qelpeghhlleghhiini meghmeng esnighaghaquq ‘when opening the pumphouse faucet, it regularly squirts water’"	ысньиӷаӷ-
esnighqwagh-	pos	IPA	to beachcomb	No information given.	ысньиҳқӱаӷ-
esnighte-	pos	IPA	to go along the shore; to beachcomb; to walk around	esnightuq ‘he is going along the shore’; esnightaa ‘he is going along it’ / taaghtam esnighsimi guygut aqnightelget ‘the doctor went around to the houses with people that had medical conditions’	ысньиҳты-
espagna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under paagna	ыспагна
espamna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  paamna	ыспамна
espikna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under piikna	ыспикньа
esqagna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under qaagna	ысқагна
esqakemna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under qakemna	ысқакымна
esqamna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  qaamna	ысқамна
esqawna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under qaawna	ысқаӱна
esquughqe-	pos	IPA	to be covered with mosquito bites	No information given.	ысқӯҳқы-
estaaghagh-	pos	IPA	to slide down repeatedly	"Meteghllugllagnguq taana estaaghaamalghii. ‘That big raven, they say, was sliding down repeatedly.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:5)"	ыстāӷаӷ-
estaaghaghvigek	pos	IPA	children's slide	No information given.	ыстāӷаӷвигык
estamagneq	pos	IPA	four things; four groups	"used with a plural ending and therefore realized as estamagneghet, estamagneghneng, etc.; used to indicate four things, when the noun for that thing is used in  the plural or dual even for a single entitity, or to indicate four groups (such as families), thus: Isiqaghlleghhangunaamta tamlaghqutkakut, estamagneghni angyani. ‘Without splashing we landed in four boats.’ (PANGEGH. 24; note that plural, angyat, is used for a single ‘boat and crew’)"	ыстамагнық
Estamallgha aghneq	pos	IPA	Wednesday	so called because Wednesday is the fourth day of the week	Ыстамальҳа аӷнық
estamaneng inglulek	pos	IPA	nine	No information given.	ыстаманың иңлюлык
estamat 	pos	IPA	four	"estamaneng  yuuk unangumalghii ‘the man got four (seals)’; estamaat ‘the fourth one of them’; the word estamat is a plural, but the singular, estama, can also occur as in: Elngaatall utaqiigukut, amsanaghllugllak, estama qavaq. ‘We were waiting a long time as it was very calm [no wind], four days and nights.’ (PANGEGH. 14)"	ыстамат
este-	pos	IPA	to leak air (out); to deflate	Chukotkan (R): = elte-	ысты-
esteg-	pos	IPA	"to delaminate; to peel off in layers; to skin (it – not carcass); to slide down (of pants, socks, etc.)"	"allighteraaghqek estegtuk ‘his socks slid down’; estegtaquq ‘he is peeling off a layer of his clothes’; estegtaa ‘he peeled the skin off it’; estegsimakek qulliraaghegni ivghaaneghmeng taaqsami ‘he unrolled the legs of his pants after he finished wading’; kaviiq taaqsamigu aftaneghmeng estegsimakang ‘when he finished slitting the skin of the fox, he stripped the skin off it’; cf. estek"	ыстыг-
esteggaghte-	pos	IPA	to get a blister; to scrape a layer off a layer of one’s skin	No information given.	ыстыхаҳты-
estegmik	pos	IPA	big hunting knife worn on belt	No information given.	ыстыгмик
Estegragvak	pos	IPA	former village at the northwest point of Yttygran Is. in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Ысьыграгвак
estegtaq	pos	IPA	laver (seaweed) (Porphyra laciniata)	"a seaweed type which is long, brown, ribbon-like and wavy-edged; cf. estek"	ыстыхтақ
estek	pos	IPA	pocket; bunched up thread or fabric (from being pulled an opening)	"Ilangi qafsinaneng estelwaaqluteng, … ‘Some had several pockets, …’ (KALLAG. 48); estegmigaa ‘he put it in his pocket’; estegmikaa ‘he has it in his pocket’; this is apparently a direct nominalization of esteg-"	ыстык
esteqaq	pos	IPA	muscle	No information given.	ыстықақ
esteqe-	pos	IPA	to persevere; to endure; to tense muscles and keep them tensed	"estequq ‘he tensed his muscles, persevered’ / estequtaa ‘he endured it’; estequsimakanga yugem aleni iqunnaqeghngaatni ‘the man tensed and held on so that the other man wouldn't knock him down’"	ыстықы-
estiimae	pos	IPA	steam; steamboat; cutter	also used in Chukotka	ыстӣмаы
estiimaraq	pos	IPA	steamboat; cutter	also used in Chukotka	ыстӣмарақ
estu- 	pos	IPA	to slide	"Eng, estu, sayugnaangitamken meghmun aatqaghtekuvek! ‘Well then, slide, (however) I won’t pull you out if you plunge down into the water!’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:6)"	ысту-
estugaq*	pos	IPA	store	estugaghmi qepghaghaquq ‘he works at the store’	ыстугақ
estugem sigutanga	pos	IPA	hangnail	literally: 'nail's ear'	ыстугым сигутаңа
estuget	pos	IPA	ice creeper	"Chukotkan (R); literally, ‘finger (or toe) nails’"	ыстурыт
estugh-	pos	IPA	with legs stretched out	"postural root; estughtuq ‘he stretched his legs’; estughtaa ‘he stretched its leg out’; estughngaaq ‘he has his legs stretched out, it has had its legs stretched out’"	ыстуӷ-
estugigh-	pos	IPA	to trim one’s nails	estugightuq ‘he is trimming his (own) nails’; estugighaa ‘he is trimming his (another’s) nails’ /	ыстугиӷ-
estugiisiq	pos	IPA	nail clippers or trimmers	"dual, estugiisik, used for one pair"	ыстугӣсиқ
estugkaaq	pos	IPA	twig; branch	Chukotkan (R)	ыстухкāқ
estugmig-	pos	IPA	to scratch with fingernails; to protect using the claws; to beat with hoofs	estugmigtuq ‘he scratched himself’; estugmigaa ‘he scratched her or it’ /	ыстугмиг-
estuk	pos	IPA	fingernail; toenail; claw; hoof	No information given.	ыстук
estulgha-	pos	IPA	to go forward fast especially when sliding downward	"qamiyek qiighnam estulghanapigtuk leganqun estulghameng igleghtunga ‘on account of the slipperiness, the sled went very fast and  I traveled as if sliding down fast forward’; ilagalghiim ilagaatni estulghastaa ‘the singer let it come out in their (other’s) songs’ (figurative use)"	ыстулӷа-
estullugneq	pos	IPA	knot at end of rope to keep it from slipping through hole	No information given.	ыстульюгнық
estullugte-	pos	IPA	to tie knot at the end of a rope to keep it from slipping out of something	uyiighem iqugi estullugtekat satemnayukata ‘a knot is usually tied at the ends of a rawhide rope to keep the rope from slipping’; tapghaam iquga estulluggnaken ‘(you) tie the end of the rope’	ыстульюхты-
estullugtelleq	pos	IPA	knot at end of rope to keep it from slipping through hole	No information given.	ыстульюхтыльық
estulluk	pos	IPA	skin-boot made from reindeer leg	No information given.	ыстульюк
estulluyaaq	pos	IPA	child’s skin-boot	No information given.	ыстульюя̄қ
ete-	pos	IPA	to be	"obsolete base, found in forms such as angyametuq ‘it is in the boat’ (from *angyami etuq), yugem angyaanituq ‘it is in the man’s boat’ (from yugem anyaani etuq); whaantuq ‘it is here’ (from *whani etuq); iggagmetuq ‘it is leaning’ (from * iggagmi etuq); ellngitnituq ‘he is with or among them’ (from *ellngitni etuq); ellnginaghmetuten ‘you are alone’ (from ellnginaghmete- ‘to be alone’, but note that this truly has become lexicalized; one would not have said *ellnginaghmi etuten, but only *ellnginaghpek etuten)"	ыты-
evelegtagh- 	pos	IPA	to vibrate; to bounce	= uvelegtagh-	ывылыхтаӷ-
evlawa	pos	IPA	flour	= avlawa; also used in Chukotka	ывляӱа
evlegh-	pos	IPA	to shimmer; to glitter; to be shiny	"evleqegtaq ‘glittery thing’; = qavlegh-, qelmegh-, uvlegh-"	ывлыӷ-
evleq	pos	IPA	sheen; gloss; luster	"cf. qavlegh-, qelmegh-, uvlegh-"	ывлық
evleqegte-	pos	IPA	to be shiny	< evleq-kegte-	ывлықыхты-
evluk	pos	IPA	sea swell; ocean wave	= uveluk; evluget taangani aangepigtut ‘he swell are very big out there’; niinghutaghalghiim evlugan repall kaatiinkut ‘the sea swell(s) of the one plunging around reached us with impact’	ывлюк
evzi	pos	IPA	limp thing(s); thing(s) that have collapsed together	evzit qungangitnun iighumalghiit ‘they hid between the things that had collapsed together’; evzingwaaghughsimalghii qavam ‘he felt limp on account of sleep’	ывзи
gaagh-	pos	IPA	to cook	gaaghtuq ‘he cooked’; gaaghaa ‘he cooked it’ /gaaghutaa ‘she cooked for him’	гāӷ-
gaaghaq	pos	IPA	something that has been cooked	No information given.	гāӷақ
gaaghta	pos	IPA	cook; chef	No information given.	гāҳта
gaaghusiq	pos	IPA	cooking pot; stove; cooking device	"used in the dual, gaaghusik, for one stove or cooking device"	гāӷусиқ
gaaleq	pos	IPA	small net to catch seals	Chukotkan (R)	гāлық
gaaqaq	pos	IPA	something that has been cooked	No information given.	гāқақ
gaarineq	pos	IPA	gun powder; ash	No information given.	гāринық
gagsawi-	pos	IPA	to be in a hurry	No information given.	гахсяӱи-
gakangqa	pos	IPA	puller (draft animal)	Chukotkan (R)	гакаңқа
gaymaangi 	pos	IPA	extravagantly; despite anything; anyway	Chukotkan; particle; exact meaning undertermined; Gaymaangi nuliighhighnaqaqa. ‘I’m going to take his wife anyway.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 43)	гаӥмāңи
gaymaangike-	pos	IPA	to be able to do something (?)	Chukotkan (R); exact meaning undertermined	гаӥмāңиқы-
gaymaangitke-	pos	IPA	to probably be continuing despite anything; to use wastefully	exact meaning undertermined	гаӥмāңиткы-
gaymaawi-	pos	IPA	to be completely engrossed in what one is doing; to use something extravagantly; to enjoy life; to live in satisfaction	"gaymaawiiq ‘he is completely engrossed in his actions’ / tengyaghqat atughtet igiighsiitkelluku atuqaghluteng, elngaatall gaymaawiyalghiimeng nagaquumangisimakangit tengekayuget, kaalluteng, enmis aga, unilluteng ‘the singers, who were supposed to fly out, decided to practice awhile, but became so engrossed in their singing that the plane, without their noticing it, had arrived and had already left’"	гаӥмāӱи-
gelgaghniigh-	pos	IPA	to commit adultery	"Nagaquqaqaghsi whaten pilleq, “Gelgaghniighpenasi.” Iwernga whanga piimsi, kitum alngunak esghaghluku aghnaq qiliiqegkumigu taawa gelgaghniighuuq qamagun ilumikun. ‘‘You’ve heard it said, “Don’t commit adultery.” However  I say to you, that whover looks at a woman lusting after her, is already committing adultery in his heart.’ (Matthew 5.27)"	гылгаӷнӣӷ-
gelgaq	pos	IPA	illicit lover	also written egelgaq	гылгақ
gerungawae	pos	IPA	yellow meat fly	Chukotkan; cf. nguuyngaaghaq ‘housefly’	гыруңаӱаы
getgeta	pos	IPA	some; somehow; barely; holding off	particle	гытхыта
geve-	pos	IPA	to render oil from fat; to compress; to slip one’s mind	"gevuq ‘it is losing its oil, it is being compressed’ / gevestaa ‘he compressed it’; uqut temngi tamaani kiyaghtesleghhiini mesiighi gevaqut ‘when blubber is left laying around the oil seeps out of it’; ayumiq aghnat uqut kapeghlluki mesiighi gevesteghllagaqiit sukalluku mesiingnaluteng ‘in the past women would pound on blubber to render the oil from it when they needed oil in a hurry’; cf. ege-"	гывы-
gevragh-	pos	IPA	to ooze out	Chukotkan	гывраӷ-
ggaagiite-	pos	IPA	to become dull through long use	Chukotkan	хāгӣты-
ggaagraketun	pos	IPA	with a rasping or grating sound; in a high-pitched voice	particle; ggaagraketun elngaatall ilagaghtuq ‘she sang in a high-pitched voice’	хāгракытун
ggaak	pos	IPA	rasping sound; grating sound; file; rasp	ggaaguutuq ‘there is a rasping or grating sound’; ggaagmeng nagaquutunga ‘I hear a rasping or grating sound’	хāк
ggata	pos	IPA	upper part of body or garment; torso; back of person; shirt or blouse	"ggaatka ‘my torso, my back, my shirt’: Uyughaqa kavilnguugneng ggatengllaghaqa. ‘I made my younger sibling a red shirt.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 52)"	хата
ggatek	pos	IPA	blouse; shirt	gategka ‘my shirt’	хатык
ggatemqaaghek 	pos	IPA	jacket; blouse; shirt	Chukotkan	хатымқāӷык
ggatmeghruk	pos	IPA	area between shoulder blades	cf. tatmeghruk	хатмьыӷрук
ggayegtaq	pos	IPA	the part of a whale shoulder blade used as a lamp support	No information given.	хаӥыхтақ
ggayek	pos	IPA	shoulder blade	ggaaska ‘my shoulder blade’; ggaaygegka ‘my shoulder blades2’; ggaayga ‘his shoulder blade’; ggaaskek ‘his shoulder blades2’	хаӥык
gge	pos	IPA	signifies approval	interjectional particle	хы
ggii-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > ggiightenge-, ggiighsi-, ggiilleq, ggiisaqu, ggiiste-"	хӣ-
ggiighsi-	pos	IPA	to be in pain from a wound	No information given.	хӣҳси-
ggiightenge-	pos	IPA	to hurt (of wound)	kilillgha ggiightengaquq ‘her wound hurts’	хӣҳтыңы-
ggiilleq	pos	IPA	woody core of edible willow root	Kumaghhneghmeggni taakut uqfigam ggiillghi paneghqughaqiit uglaghinaqepiglluki. ‘For making fire sthey would dry lots of willow root cores.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:236)	хӣльық
ggiinaghruugte-	pos	IPA	"to get a sick, tired expression; to frown at someone"	"gginaghruugtuq ‘his face has a sick, tired look, he is frowning at someone’ / gginaghruugutaa ‘he is frowning at her’; = gginaghlluugte-"	хӣнаӷрӯхты-
ggiisaqu-	pos	IPA	to keep on clenching one’s the teeth (often of a polar bear)	nanuum ggiisaqutaa ‘the polar bear was clenching its teeth toward him’	хӣсяқу-
ggiiste-	pos	IPA	to clench one's teeth	ggiistuq ‘he (or it) clenched his teeth’ / ggiistutaa or ggiisutaa ‘he clenched his teeth toward him or on it’; taghnughhaam ulumun pakigusiq ggiistutaa ‘the child clenched his teeth on the tongue depressor’	хӣсты-
gginaghlluugte-	pos	IPA	"to get a sick, tired expression; to frown at someone"	"gginaghlluugtuq ‘his face has a sick, tired look, he is frowning at someone’ / gginaghlluugutaa ‘he is frowning at her’; gginaghlluugngaaq salin, qinuyaagulghii ‘her face seems sick and tired because she is not well’; = gginaghruugte-"	хинаҳлью̄хты-
gginaghsi-	pos	IPA	to come to know or recognize (a person)	gginaghsiit ‘they came to recognize him by his appearance’;  yimiksaghluku tagtalmi gginaghsiit ‘after being shy around him at length they got to know him’	хинаҳси-
gginaq	pos	IPA	face; side of hill; edge of knife	No information given.	хинақ
gginaqwaaq	pos	IPA	mask; funny face drawing	Ukiivagmiit gginaqwaaghluteng aghulakayuget. ‘The King Islanders use masks for dancing.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 52)	хинақӱāқ
gginasaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to look right in the eye; to come face to face with	"gginasaghqughaa ‘he looked him right in the eye’/ enankin gginasaghqughluku aapsaqegka tuunaanga ‘(it was me) after looking him right in the eye, I asked him, and he gave (it) to me’; gginasaghquullutungtuq aleghquuullghiikung ‘would that we two could look each other right in the eye and converse’"	хинасяҳқуӷ-
gginasaghte-	pos	IPA	to hit in the face or front	milughluku gginasaghtaa ‘he threw something at him and hit him right in the face’; anuqem naayghaq gginasaghtaa ‘the wind is blowing against the face of the mountain’	хинасяҳты-
gguta	pos	IPA	tooth	gguutka ‘my tooth’; ggutenka ‘my teeth’; gguutngi or ggutangi ‘his teeth’	хута
ggutangigh-	pos	IPA	to lose a tooth (naturally or through extraction); to extract a tooth	ggutangightuq ‘he lost a tooth’; ggutangighaa  ‘he pulled her tooth’ / = gguutngigh-	хутаңиӷ-
ggutangighta	pos	IPA	dentist	No information given.	хутаңиҳта
gguterugutkaq	pos	IPA	something frozen into the ice	ayveq mallu esnemi gguterugutkaq naalkumaa ‘he found a frozen walrus carcass as the shore’; so called because such a thing protrudes like a big tooth	хутыругуткақ
gguusiqe-	pos	IPA	to have a toothache	No information given.	хӯсиқы-
gguutngigh-	pos	IPA	to lose a tooth (naturally or through extraction); to extract a tooth	gguutngightuq ‘he lost a tooth’; gguutngighaa ‘he pulled her tooth’ / = gguutngigh-	хӯтңьиӷ-
gguutniighta	pos	IPA	dentist	No information given.	хӯтньӣҳта
ghefsigh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	ghefsightuq ‘it soaked’; ghefsighaa ‘he soaked it’ / uygaaq ghefsighyaghqaaghsimaaq ‘the bleached sealskin is ready for soaking’; ghefsighaq entaqun ghevuq ‘the one that is soaking is probably bleached already’	ӷыфсиӷ-
"ghemru-, ghemrug-"	pos	IPA	to envy another's success in hunting	ghemruuq or ghemrugtuq ‘he is envious’ /	"ӷымру-, ӷымруг-"
gheve-	pos	IPA	to fade; to discolor; to calm down after anger; to have the dirt get washed out	"ghevuq ‘it faded’, ‘he calmed down’, or ‘the dirt got washed out of it’ / ghevigatuq ‘it doesn't fade, is colorfast’"	ӷывы-
ghevraag-	pos	IPA	to be pale	esla ghevraagsimaa repall eslallugem ‘so much rain has made the sky pale’; gginaa ghevraapigtuq ‘his face is really pale’	ӷыврāг-
ghhaa	pos	IPA	"dermatitis; dry, flaky, whitish skin patch especially on the face"	#NAME?	ҳā
ghhaalgha	pos	IPA	noise made when one is in a trance as if chattering teeth but with tongue between them	No information given.	ҳāлӷа
ghhatagh-	pos	IPA	to lift off from the surface	"said of a bird or plane taking off, scab coming off, paint peeling off, etc.; ghhataghtuq ‘it lifted from the surface’ / ghhataghaghtaqa ‘I made it lift of’; ghhataghmetngwaaghtut angyat ‘the boat is hydroplaning’"	ҳатаӷ-
"ghhataghqe-, ghhataghqugh-"	pos	IPA	to peel off	ghhataghqaa ‘he peeled it off’/ ghhataghqughaa mangtegham eslataan piingha ‘he peeled off the ouside paint of the house’ 	"ҳатаҳқы-, ҳатаҳқы-"
ghhaveq	pos	IPA	disk of cartilage on the outer part of the elbow joint	No information given.	ҳавық
ghhiigh-	pos	IPA	to get broken in (of a new item)	ghhiightuq or ghhiighaa ‘it got broken in’ /ghhiighsaghaa ‘he broke it in’; ullghitak ghhiighwaaghumaak ‘the snow machine is already well broken in’; ghhiighyalghiimek qiighnaghqwaagaak ‘now that it (they2) are broken in (one sees that) it runs well’	ҳӣӷ-
ghhiighsagh-	pos	IPA	"to break in (machinery, vehicle, etc.)"	ghhiighsaghaak ullghitaghraghaagni ‘he broke in his new wheeled/tracked vehicle’	ҳӣҳсяӷ-
ghhiitagh-	pos	IPA	to pluck	ghhiitaghtuq ‘he plucked a bird’; ghhiitaghaa ‘he plucked it’ / 	ҳӣтаӷ-
ghhukaghaq	pos	IPA	small urine pot with handle on side; small commode	No information given.	ҳукаӷақ
"ghhuta, ghhwuta"	pos	IPA	old-fashioned wooden urine tub; commode	"used to hold urine which was used for processing skin, washing hair and disinfecting; also dual, ghhutek or ghhwutek, for one such tub"	"ҳута, ҳӱута"
ghhuu-	pos	IPA	to freeze (to death); to die by freezing	ghhuuguq or ghhuugaa ‘he froze (to death)’ / ghhuukaq ‘one that has frozen’	ҳӯ-
ghhuugh-	pos	IPA	to inflate	ghhuughtuq ‘it puffed up (e.g. dead animal)’; ghhuughaa ‘he inflated it’ / ghhuughaq ‘inflated thing’	ҳӯӷ-
ghhuughagh-	pos	IPA	to inhale and exhale forcefully; to pant	ghhuughaghtuq ‘he panted’ / 	ҳӯӷаӷ-
ghhuughaghte-	pos	IPA	to be washed away by high water	ghhuughaghtuq or ghhuughaghtaa ‘it was washed away’ /	ҳӯӷаҳты-
ghhuughpagtagh-	pos	IPA	"to puff up in various places; to bubble, to blister"	ghhuughpagtaghtuq ‘it puffed up in various places’	ҳӯҳпахтаӷ-
ghhuughqaq	pos	IPA	lead (metal)	negaghpaget ghhuuqameng uqigtuqutelget ‘the big net has lead weights’	ҳӯҳқақ
ghhuuligh-	pos	IPA	to load (a gun)	ghhuulighaa ‘he loaded it’ /	ҳӯлиӷ-
ghhuuq	pos	IPA	bullet; arrow; dart; ammunition	No information given.	ҳӯқ
ghhuute-	pos	IPA	to be cold (of humans and animals)	ghhuutuq or ghhuutaa ‘he is cold’ / ghhuutestaa supugem ‘the draft made him cold’; Egllugput kayaalistepaglukek ghhuutiinkut. ‘We let our stove get too low and we were cold.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 54); ghhuutqaghtuq ‘he suddenly felt chilled’	ҳӯты-
ghhuuyug-	pos	IPA	to feel chills as from illness	ghhuuyugtuq ‘he feels chilled’ / ghhuuyugtestaa qinuyuum ‘not feeling well is giving him chills’	ҳӯюг-
ghhuuyugaghte-	pos	IPA	to have chills going up and down the spine	No information given.	ҳӯюгаҳты-
ghhuuyugniighsagh-	pos	IPA	to dress for the cold	ghhuuyugniighsaghtuq ‘he dressed for the cold’; ghhuuyugniighsaghaa ‘he dressed her for the cold’ /	ҳӯюгнӣҳсяӷ-
ghii	pos	IPA	fish milt	No information given.	ӷӣ
gigik	pos	IPA	expression of exasperation and/or impatience	exclamatory particle	гигик
giimaq	pos	IPA	ivory socket at end of harpoon shaft into which fits the piece (tungik) between the point and the shaft of the harpoon	No information given.	гӣмақ
giimasaak	pos	IPA	"kind of fish, identified as 'white sturgeon'"	exact identification undetermined; ‘white sturgeon’ identification may be inaccurate	гӣмася̄к
giniwan	pos	IPA	expression of hopeless expectation or longing	"particle; giniwanllu tagiighllequt whavek ‘she could come here, but of course not, they won’t come’; also giniwanllu or ginawanngam"	гиниӱан
gitasa	pos	IPA	front gunsight	Chukotkan	гитася
gu-gu-gu-gu-guy	pos	IPA	a call to the master of the heavens	#NAME?	гу-гу-гу-гу-гуӥ
guguk	pos	IPA	start!; go!	exclamatory particle; = uuhuk	гугук
guq 	pos	IPA	yes	Chukotkan; particle	гуқ
guugh-	pos	IPA	bent forward with head down	postural root: guughtuq ‘he is bending over forward’; guughtaa ‘he bent it forward’ / guughngaaq ‘he is bent over forward; guughtestaa ‘he made him bend over forward’; Guughllunga analghwaaghet tunutangitni ingaghhneghsighaqa uugta. ‘I stooped down behind a small pile of ice and waited until the seal went back to sleep.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 51)	гӯӷ-
guughqe-	pos	IPA	to bend over forward putting the head down	No information given.	гӯҳқы-
guughqe-	pos	IPA	to bend over forward	guughtuq ‘he bent over forward’; guughtaa ‘he bent her over forward’ / guughqestaa ‘he made her bend over forward’	гӯҳқы-
guughte-	pos	IPA	to bend one’s head down	guughtuq ‘he bent his (own) head down’; guughtaa ‘he bent his (another’s) head down’ / guughtestaa ‘he made her bend her head down’	гӯҳты-
guulgun	pos	IPA	"crosspiece in roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	this crosspiece is supported by an internal pole (ayagun) and supporting roof poles (ighuluq); = nuulgun	гӯлгун
guullaataqu-	pos	IPA	to shoot very well; to catch lots of seals; to dance very well	guullaataquuq ‘he shot well’; guullaataqwaa ‘he shot it accurately’ /	гӯлья̄тақу-
guunaq	pos	IPA	edible nut	Chukotkan	гӯнақ
guunniigh-	pos	IPA	to shoot at game; to pick a fight with	"guunniightuq ‘he shot at game’; guuniighaa ‘he picked a fight with him’ / Mekelghiighek esghaghagka savigmeng guunniighusiqlutek pillugullghiik.’ I saw two boys fighting, trying to strike each other with a knife.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 51)"	гӯньӣӷ-
guunniighnaqe-	pos	IPA	to go out to hunt; to go out to pick a fight	"guunniighnaquq ‘he went hunting ‘, ‘he went to pick a fight’"	гӯньӣӷнақы-
guunniighun	pos	IPA	weapon	#NAME?	гӯньӣӷун
guunniighusiq	pos	IPA	weapon	#NAME?	гӯньӣӷусиқ
guusagh-	pos	IPA	to misfire; to fail to shoot	guusaghtuq ‘it misfired’; guusaghaa ‘he tried to shoot with it but failed’ /	гӯсяӷ-
guusaghqaq	pos	IPA	explosive; thing to shoot	No information given.	гӯсяҳқақ
guute-	pos	IPA	to shoot; to dance or otherwise act vigorously; to start (engine)	guutuq ‘he shot’; guutaa ‘he shot it’ / guunnaq ‘something desirable to shoot’; elngaatall guututut atughllagluteng ‘they really danced hard to the Yupik singing’	гӯты-
guuteste-	pos	IPA	to start (engine)	guutestaa ‘he started it’ /	гӯтысты-
guutun	pos	IPA	weapon; income	sangwaangam guututngunaqlaataghta? ‘what are we going to have for our income?’	гӯтун
guygu	pos	IPA	summer house; modern frame building	this word is used now for apartment houses and the like in Chukotka	гуӥгу
guygungwaaq	pos	IPA	small house; cabin	No information given.	гуӥгуңӱāқ
haam	pos	IPA	enough!; that's enough; all right; so be it	"particle; Sangwaa sumeghmikelleghpigaan sivukluku pinaaghan. Haam taawa ungipaatamken. ‘Whatever you thought of most, you will accomplish first. Enough, I have now told you.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:29); = ahaam"	гāм
haamangam	pos	IPA	enough!; that's enough; all right; so be it	particle; = haamangamngam	гāмаңам
haanta	pos	IPA	all-terrain vehicle (ATV)	base is haanta-; haantat ‘all-terrain vehicles’	гāнта
haatwarae	pos	IPA	hot water	#NAME?	гāтӱараы
haaw 	pos	IPA	is anyone there?	particle; = ahaaw	гāӱ
hay 	pos	IPA	what did you say?; huh?	particle; = ay	гаӥ
heng	pos	IPA	now; next	"particle; Seghleghhalek qenwatlu mengyaghnaqiinkut-aa, heng elngaatall araghtek. ‘Oh great! We are finally going to be spooked, now yell all you can.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:170); Anipam meteghlluk pimakanga, ""Heng, elpegngam.""""Aa-a"", meteghlluk aangghumalghii.” ‘Owl said to raven, “and next, it’s your turn.” “Yes”, agreed raven.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222); = eng"	гың
Hotel	pos	IPA	site at cliffs on the southeast side of Myghapowit Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is. 	No information given.	готыл
huk	pos	IPA	oops!; watch out!; oh dear!	particle; = uuk	гук
huusae	pos	IPA	hose	#NAME?	гӯсяы
huuy 	pos	IPA	what did you say?; anyone there?	particle	гӯӥ
i	pos	IPA	oops!	exclamatory particle	и
i-ik	pos	IPA	expression of surprise or annoyance	Chukotkan (R); exclamatory particle	и-ик
ifkaasiq	pos	IPA	parachute	No information given.	ифкāсиқ
ifkagh-	pos	IPA	to fall from height; to drop (accidentally)	ifkaghtuq ‘he or it fell’; ifkaghaa ‘he dropped it (accidentally)’/	ифкаӷ-
ifkaghte-	pos	IPA	to drop (accidentally or intentionally); to kill	"ifkaghtaa ‘he dropped it, made it fall (accidentally or intentionally), killed it’; ifkaghqughtuq ‘he is letting things fall’"	ифкаҳты-
ifla-	pos	IPA	to lose; to get lost; to die	iflaaq ‘he or it got lost’; iflaa ‘he lost it’ / ifliiguq ‘he lost something’; aghnam saghyani iflii ‘the woman lost her belongings’; net ifliiguq ‘the household lost a member (through death)’; Taananguq yuuk iflamaaq ighivgaq. ‘That person passed away last night.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 55)	ифлья-
iflaaghwagh-	pos	IPA	to lose consciousness; to faint; to feel faint; to pass out; to be incoherent; to be in a daze	"iflaaghwaghtuq ‘he lost consciousness’, ‘he was incoherent’, ‘he was in a daze’ /"	ифлья̄ӷӱаӷ-
iflii-	pos	IPA	to lose something; to suffer a loss through someone’s death	ifliiguq ‘he lost something’ / net ifliigut ‘the household has lost something’ or ‘the household has lost a loved one through death’	ифльӣ-
igaasiq	pos	IPA	pencil; pen; writing device	No information given.	игāсиқ
igagh-	pos	IPA	to make a design; to write; to apply a tattoo; to go to school	"igaghtuq ‘he wrote, applied a tattoo, made a design, went to school’; igaghaa ‘he wrote on it, made a design on it, applied a tattoo to him’ / igaataa ‘she wrote for him’; igallgituq ‘he can't write well’; = iyagh-"	игаӷ-
igaghneq	pos	IPA	socket at end of harpoon shaft	Chukotka (R)	игаӷнық
igaghqwaaq	pos	IPA	scratch paper; piece of paper	No information given.	игаҳқӱāқ
igaghraak	pos	IPA	granite or similar spotted rock	No information given.	игаӷрāк
igaghta	pos	IPA	writer; teacher	No information given.	игаҳта
igaghute-	pos	IPA	to come to an agreement with someone	Chukotkan (R)	игиӷуты-
igaghvik	pos	IPA	school; writing place; college	No information given.	игаӷвик
igaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to scribble	igaghwaaghtuq ‘he scribbled’; igaghwaaghaa ‘he scribbled on it’ /	игаӷӱāӷ-
igaghyagh-	pos	IPA	to go to school	igaghyaghtuq ‘he went to school’ / igaghyaataa ‘he took it to school’	игаӷьяӷ-
igaghyaghqaq	pos	IPA	writing paper	No information given.	игаӷьяҳқақ
igaghyaghta	pos	IPA	pupil; student	No information given.	игаӷьяҳта
igaghyaq	pos	IPA	pupil; student	Neghestim kingunganeng igaghyat nuugllequnnguq whavek igaghvigraghaghmun. ‘After Thanksgiving the students will move here into the new school.’ (SULUWET 5)	игаӷьяқ
igalghutaq	pos	IPA	container for paper; briefcase; filing cabinet; bookshelf or bookcase	No information given.	игалӷутақ
igalnga-	pos	IPA	utilizing an unexpected opportunity or inviting situation	emotional root; igalngayugtuq ‘he’s utilizing an opportunity’; igalngakaa ‘he’s utilizing it (opportunity)’; igalnganaghtuq ‘it is affording an opportunity’; Sivungaghqaannaqelghiit igalngakanka igleghalgukaghaat ‘I’ve taken the opportunity to follow those traveling going to Savoonga’; igalnganak meghek maligtagket angyat ‘the boats are following in the path of the inviting open ocean water’	игалңа-
igamriiqayuk	pos	IPA	illiterate person	Chukotkan (R)	игамрӣқаюк
igamsiqa-	pos	IPA	thankful; grateful	"emotional root; igamsiqayugtuq ‘he is thankful’; igamisiqayugvikaa ‘he expressed his thankfulness to her, he thanked her’; igamsiqayugutkaa ‘he is thankful for it’; igamsiqanaq ‘something that makes one thankful’; igamsiqanaghtuq ‘it makes one thankful’; Kinkut kayusinghinkut igamsiqanaghtuq. ‘The helpfulness of others to us makes one thankful.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 55); = iyamsiqa-"	игамсиқа-
igamsiqanaghhalek	pos	IPA	"thank you very much; oh, how grateful that makes one!"	particle; =  iyamsiqanaghhalek	игамсиқанаҳалык
igangeltaq	pos	IPA	leaflet; pamphlet; tract; small decoration; small design	#NAME?	игаңыльтақ
igangestaq	pos	IPA	leaflet; pamphlet; tract; small decoration; small design	#NAME?	игаңыстақ
igaq	pos	IPA	design; tattoo (especially on a man's arm after he has caught a whale); book; schooling	= iyaq; igiituq ‘it has no design’ or ‘he has no schooling’	игақ
igaqe-	pos	IPA	to write (it) down; to photograph	igaqaa ‘he wrote it down or photographed it’ / igaqiiq ‘he took a picture’	игақы-
igaqegkaq	pos	IPA	photograph; something written	No information given.	игақыгкақ
igaqisiq	pos	IPA	camera	"used in the dual, igaqisik, for one camera"	игақисиқ
igaqista	pos	IPA	photographer	No information given.	игақиста
igaqragh-	pos	IPA	to make a design or trim; to embroider	igaqraghtuq ‘he made a design’; igaqraghaa ‘he made a design on it’ / igaqraamakek kaamgegni ‘she put trim on her boots’	игақшаӷ-
igaqraq	pos	IPA	design; trim; embroidery	No information given.	игақшақ
igaqugh-	pos	IPA	to photograph several times	igaqughaa ‘he photographed it or him several times’ /	игақуӷ-
igarutaagh-	pos	IPA	to drill a hole	igarutaaghtuq ‘he drilled a hole’; igarutaaghaa ‘he drilled a hole in it’ / = iyarutaagh-	игарутāӷ-
igarutaaq	pos	IPA	drill	"also used in the dual, igarutaaghek, for one drill; = iyarutaaq"	игарутāқ
igatagh-	pos	IPA	to be hungry	igataghtuq ‘he is hungry’ / = iyatagh-; cf. igayughqe-	игатаӷ-
igataghnaq	pos	IPA	famine	#NAME?	игатаӷнақ
igataghniighusiq	pos	IPA	song sung against hunger (due to sorcery or conpiracy); supplication song  for food	Chukotkan (R)	игатаӷнӣӷусиқ
igatiqe-	pos	IPA	to suffer from hunger; to go hungry	"Mekelghiighhaq negaghaghluku qawaagtaqelghii, enkaam ilangani igatigalnguuk nengyuqulghiik. ‘The little boy would catch birds by snaring, and sometimes grandmother and grandson would not go hungry.’ (AANGHHAQ 43) "	игатиқы-
igayughqe-	pos	IPA	to eat lots on account of hunger or for enjoyment; to eat one’s fill; to overeat; to gorge	aghnelqusiq neghegpenani kiyaghlluni kaalluni igayughqumalghii ‘after existing without having eating all day when he arrived he ate a lot’; neqet igayughqutkii ‘he ate a lot of food’; = igaghyughqe-; cf. igatagh-	игаюҳқы-
iggaarqitaagh-	pos	IPA	to rock back and forth	No information given.	ихāшқитāӷ-
iggaarqitaaghusiq	pos	IPA	see-saw; teeter-totter	"used in the dual, iggaarqitaaghusik, for one teeter-totter"	ихāшқитāӷусиқ
iggaarqitaaq	pos	IPA	see-saw; teeter-totter	"used in the dual, iggaarqitaaghek, for one teeter-totter"	ихāшқитāқ
iggag-	pos	IPA	tilting	postural root; iggagtuq ‘it tilted’; iggagtaa ‘he tilted it’ / iggagngaaq ‘it is tilting’	ихаг-
iggagpagtagh-	pos	IPA	to rock	iggagpagtaghtuq ‘it rocked’	ихахпахтаӷ-
iggagrakegte-	pos	IPA	to be steep; to be too slanted	iggagrakegtuq ‘it is steep’ / yuuk iggagrakegtellghakun naaygham ukigtuq ‘the man came down on the steep side of the mountain’	ихагракыхты-
iggagrakgite-	pos	IPA	to not be steep	iggagrakgituq ‘it isn't steep’ /	ихагракхиты-
iggasighte-	pos	IPA	to lie down supporting oneself on arm and elbow	No information given.	ихасиҳты-
igha-	pos	IPA	disgusted; feeling aversion	emotional root; ighayugtuq ‘he feels aversion or disgust’; ighayukaa or ighakaa ‘he feels aversion or disgust towards it’; ighanaghtuq ‘it causes aversion or disgust’; ighanaq ‘disgusting thing’	иӷа-
ighaleqetaaghem anaa	pos	IPA	comet	"literally, ‘star’s feces’; note that the phrase for ‘star’s feces’ in Central Yup’ik means ‘meteor’, but in Kobuk Inupiaq it means both ‘meteor’ and  ‘comet’"	иӷалықытāӷым анā
ighaleqetaaq	pos	IPA	star	"compare proto-Yupik i3aluq 'moon, month', and note that -qetaaq is from the postbase -qitaaq meaning 'small' or 'back and forth', so that the word ighaleqetaaq originally would have meant ‘small or twinkling moon’, later ‘moon-like thing’"	иӷалықытāқ
ighaluqaq	pos	IPA	auklet aged in seal oil for eating	"compare proto-Yupik i3aluq 'moon, month', and note that auklets are aged for about a month; the postbase in the word here being -(g)kaq, ‘one that has been V-ed’"	иӷалюқақ
ighaluqi-	pos	IPA	to age auklets in seal oil	No information given.	иӷалюқи-
ighelleghyiqe-	pos	IPA	to limp	No information given.	иӷыльыӷӥиқы-
igherngu-	pos	IPA	"uncomfortable, awkward, or embarrassed upon observing something that is too private, indecent or otherwise disquieting"	emotional root; ighernguyugtuq ‘he felt disquieted by what he saw’; igherngunapigtuq ighungunateng yuget ‘people without legs can make one feel very awkward’; pegnem piyulghii ighernguyagusimaaq ‘the one walking with great effort became a cause of awkwardness to those watching him’	иӷырңу-
ighi-	pos	IPA	to flock; to be plentiful (birds)	upenghanghani sukilpaq ighikayuk ‘in spring the auklet tend to flock’; ighikan qawaagyaqaghllequnga ‘when the birds become plentiful I’ll go bird-hunting’; cf. ighivgaayaq	иӷи-
ighigh-	pos	IPA	tilting (especially one's head)	postural root; ighightuq ‘he tilted his head’; ighightaa ‘he tilted it’ / ighighngaaq ‘it is tilted’	иӷиӷ-
ighighaghiitaq	pos	IPA	support to keep something from tilting	"ighighaghiitaq kelengakluku uullghaghsaqunaan ‘be careful with the support, and don’t let it fall over’"	иӷиӷаӷӣтақ
"ighighneq, ighighlleq"	pos	IPA	"edge of ice that has been carried north by current, then pushed south; sea ice moved by current or wind to so that it collects in a bay or cove of land or of an ice field"	see item 13 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	"иӷиӷнық, иӷиҳльық"
ighileqitaagh-	pos	IPA	to tickle	Chukotkan; ighileqitaaghtuq ‘he tickled someone’; ighileqitaaghaa ‘he tickled her’ / = qeleqetaagh-	иӷилықитāӷ-
ighivgaayaq	pos	IPA	evening flight of birds	cf. ighi	иӷивгāяқ
ighivgaghniimna	pos	IPA	thing the same as that of yesterday; thing from yesterday	ighivgaghniimnat ugket neghnaqaput ‘we’ll eat the same things as yesterday’; ighivgaghniimna movie pinaqlaataghaa ‘the movie is the same as yesterday’s’	иӷивгаӷнӣмна
ighivgaghsi-	pos	IPA	to stay out late	Naken pizin? Ulapsaneng piziin? Ighivgasighllalghiiten. ‘Where are you coming from? Are you coming from exercising? You’ve been out very late.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:20)	иӷивгаҳси-
ighivgaq	pos	IPA	yesterday; evening; yesterday evening; last night	"ighivgaghmi ‘in the evening’; ighivgaangani ‘the day before yesterday, the evening of the day before yesterday, or in the evening of that particular day’; Iteghluni yuget esghaghyaqminiki, yuget ungagpalluut, ighivgaghniineng aangelghiit. ‘He went in and when he saw the people he saw that they had heavy beards and were bigger than (they had been) the day before.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 50)); ighivgaq can serve as a particle as in kaatut ighivgaq ‘they arrived yesterday’"	иӷивгақ
ighivgaqun	pos	IPA	this evening; tonight	particle	иӷивгақун
ighivgaqutaq	pos	IPA	supper; dinner	Chukotkan	иӷивгақутақ
ighleg-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > ighlegtu, ighleke-, ighlegite-"	иӷлыг-
ighlegite-	pos	IPA	to be generous; to not hold back what one has; to not hesitate to give	ighlegituq ‘he is generous’ /	иӷлыгиты-
ighlegtu-	pos	IPA	to be stingy	ighlegtuuq ‘he is stingy’ / ighlegtuqaq ‘stingy person’	иӷлыхту-
ighlegute-	pos	IPA	to refuse to give to (him)	ighlegutaa ‘he refused to give her something’ / 	иӷлыгуты-
ighleke-	pos	IPA	to be possessive of; to be reluctant to part with; to refuse to give (it) away	"ighlekaa ‘he is reluctant to part with it, wouldn’t give any of it away’ / "	иӷлыкы-
ighlekuughte-	pos	IPA	to absolutely refuse to allow to leave	ighlekuughtaa aglaghtesneghmeng ‘he just wouldn't let her go home’	иӷлыкӯҳты-
ighllegh-	pos	IPA	to push; to shove	ighlleghaa ‘he pushed her’ /	иҳльыӷ-
ighlleghaasiq	pos	IPA	a certain back-pushing game; cribbage board made from walrus tusk	#NAME?	иҳльыӷāсиқ
ighlleghaataq	pos	IPA	a certain back-pushing game; cribbage board made from walrus tusk	#NAME?	иҳльыӷāтақ
ighlleghagh-	pos	IPA	to keep on pushing	ighlleghaghaa ‘he kept pushing her’ /	иҳльыӷаӷ-
ighlleghun	pos	IPA	head of whaling harpoon	No information given.	иҳльыӷун
ighllu-	pos	IPA	to insert something into a hole; to clean a gun barrel; to give an enema	ighllaa ‘he inserted a rod or rod-rod like thing into it into it’ /	иҳлью-
ighllusiq	pos	IPA	enema device	No information given.	иҳльюсиқ
ighllute-	pos	IPA	to push into	ighllutuq ‘he pushed himself in’; ighllutaa ‘he pushed it in’ /	иҳльюты-
ighlluughaan	pos	IPA	gun cleaning rod	#NAME?	иҳлью̄ӷāн
ighlluughaasiq	pos	IPA	gun cleaning rod	#NAME?	иҳлью̄ӷāсиқ
ighlluughagh-	pos	IPA	to keep on probing or cleaning (as with a rifle-cleaning rod)	ighlluughaghaa ‘he kept probing into it’ / ighlluughaghaa suflugaq ‘he cleaned the gun’	иҳлью̄ӷаӷ-
ighlutku-	pos	IPA	to chant in a quavering voice.	No information given.	иӷлютку-
ighneghaq	pos	IPA	gut(s); intestine(s)	"used in the plural, ighneghat; ighneghii neghsam saghnaki ‘save the seal guts’; cf. ighneghlluk"	иӷныӷақ
ighneghlli-	pos	IPA	to process and dry the intestines of walrus or bearded seal	No information given.	иӷныҳльи-
ighneghlluk	pos	IPA	processed and dried walrus or bearded seal intestine	"cf. ighneq, ighneghaq"	иӷныҳльюк
ighneghqaq	pos	IPA	stepson; adopted son	No information given.	иӷныҳқақ
ighneghwaaghqut	pos	IPA	school of fish	Chukotkan (R)	иӷныӷӱāҳқут
ighneghwaaq	pos	IPA	finger; toe	No information given.	иӷныӷӱāқ
ighnelqusiq	pos	IPA	son (6-8 years old)	Chukotakan (V&E)	иӷныльқусиқ
ighneq	pos	IPA	son	ighneqa ‘my son’; ighnegha ‘his son’; ighnelguunga ‘I have a son (or sons)’; ighneghitunga ‘I don’t have a son’; cf. ighneghlluk	иӷнық
ighneraaq	pos	IPA	son from a temporary wife	Chukotkan  (R)	иӷнырāқ
ighni-	pos	IPA	to give birth; for a rock to crack	ighniiq ‘she gave birth’ /	иӷни-
ighniighwta	pos	IPA	female reindeer	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	иӷнӣҳӱта
ighninghhaq	pos	IPA	newborn child; woman who just gave birth	No information given.	иӷнинӷрақ
ighnivik	pos	IPA	motherland	Chukotkan (R)	иӷнивик
ighsa-1	pos	IPA	to refuse	ighsaaq ‘he refused’ / ighsaaquq aglaneghmeng ‘he has been refusing to go home’	иҳся-1
ighsa-2	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > ighsalquq, ighsalqughuk, ighsaqitagh-, ighsalqwaaq, ighsaquq"	иҳся-2
ighsaghqe-	pos	IPA	"to completely come apart, break apart or take apart"	ighsaghqaa ‘he broke or took it apart’/ ighsaghqiiq ‘he broke up something’; kellaagek ifkaghlukek ighsaghqengngwaaghumakek ‘by dropping the clock he caused it to fall apart completely’; qamiyegni ighsaghqumakek ‘he took his sled apart completely’	иҳсяҳқы-
ighsake-	pos	IPA	"to refuse (him, her, it)"	ighsakaa ‘he refused it’; tuunyaghaqa ighsakaa pilguniluni ‘he refused the thing I was trying to give (him) saying he already had (one)’; maligunnaqelghii ighsakaa kimaawistiinayukan ‘he refused (to take) the one who was going to come along lest he should slow (us) down’	иҳсякы-
ighsalqaq	pos	IPA	throat	also dual for one throat: ighsalqagka ‘my throat’; ighsalqaghlluk ‘sore throat’; ighsalqaghllulguuq ‘he has a sore throat’	иҳсяльқақ
ighsalqite-	pos	IPA	to be anxious; to be worried	No information given.	иҳсяльқиты-
ighsalqughruk	pos	IPA	windpipe	No information given.	иҳсяльқуӷрук
ighsalqwaaq	pos	IPA	larynx	No information given.	иҳсяльқӱāқ
ighsani-	pos	IPA	to refuse to do as told (from laziness or general disinclination)	No information given.	иҳсяни-
ighsanitagh-	pos	IPA	to be lazy; to be disinclined to act	"ighsanitalghii ‘lazy one’; Taagken taam kingunganeng ateqsunghisamigu Ugharratuqaq ighsanitiighusimakanga. ‘Then in the aftermath of that, since he didn’t want to have the name Mudball, it made him no longer be lazy.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 18)"	иҳсянитаӷ-
ighsaqitagh-	pos	IPA	"to have a pounding, fluttering, or palpitating heart"	"ighsaqitaghtuq ‘his heart is pounding, fluttering or palpitating’"	иҳсяқитаӷ-
ighsaqughllug-	pos	IPA	to get or have heart trouble	ighsaqughllugtuq or ighsaqughllugaa ‘his heart became bad’	иҳсяқуҳльюг-
ighsaqughwaaq	pos	IPA	clock; watch (wrist- or pocket-)	"probably so called because of the ticking of a clock sounds like a heart; often used in the dual, ighsaqughwaaghek, for one clock or watch"	иҳсяқуӷӱāқ
ighsaquq	pos	IPA	heart	No information given.	иҳсяқуқ
ighsatagh-	pos	IPA	"to habitually refuse to do as told or asked (as from shyness, haughtiness, etc.)"	No information given.	иҳсятаӷ-
ighsayagute-	pos	IPA	to get on one’s nerves; to pester	Chukotkan (R)	иҳсяягуты-
ightugh-	pos	IPA	to become soft through being flexed	ightughtuq ‘it got soft by being flexed’ / ightughtaa or ightughtestaa ‘he softened it by flexing it’; ightughqaa ‘he crumpled it up’	иҳтуӷ-
ighu	pos	IPA	"leg; ""leg""-like side-piece on flat-bottomed boat"	ighunga ‘his leg’	иӷу
"ighuli, ighulin"	pos	IPA	"temporary roof support in the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.); pole of summer tent"	No information given.	"иӷули, иӷулин"
ighulquq	pos	IPA	crab	Chukotkan	иӷульқуқ
ighuluq	pos	IPA	"tent pole; arched roof pole of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	иӷулуқ
ighunaaq	pos	IPA	bipod support for gun	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, ighunaaghek, for one such bipod support"	иӷунāқ
ighunaq	pos	IPA	something that is like a leg in appearance or function such as the part of a sled that holds the bed to the runners; stanchion of sled	No information given.	иӷунақ
ighungigh-	pos	IPA	to injure the leg; to lose a leg through injury or amputation	"ighungightuq ‘he injured his leg’, ‘he lost his leg’"	иӷуңиӷ-
ighungwaaq	pos	IPA	bipod support for gun	"ighungwaaghek, for one such bipod gun support"	иӷуңӱāқ
ighutaq	pos	IPA	side pole or stretcher or the like	No information given.	иӷутақ
ighwaaghte-	pos	IPA	to injure the leg	ighwaaghtuq ‘his or its leg got injured’; ighwaaghtaa ‘he injured its leg’ / quyngiq ighwaaghtekaq qikmim tugumaa ‘the dog caught a reindeer that had an injured leg’	иӷӱāҳты-
ighwaaghtuute-	pos	IPA	to lay and roll on the ground or in the snow (of dogs)	cf. ighu	иӷӱāҳтӯты-
ighyaghqe-	pos	IPA	to grimace	ighyaghquq ‘he grimaced’ /	иӷьяҳқы-
ighyagte-	pos	IPA	to frown; to wail (of a baby)	"ighyagtuq ‘he frowned’, ‘it (baby) wailed’ / ighyagutaa ‘he frowned at her’"	иӷьяхты-
igi-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > igiilluten, igiilngagh-, igiilnguq, igiisnayiite-, igiisniilnguq, igiitusigate-, igiitaghaq"	иги-
igiigh-	pos	IPA	to get in shape; to stand up straight; to get strong after an illness; to make up one's mind	igiightuq ‘he got in shape’ / igiightaa ‘he set it straight’	игӣӷ-
igiighneq	pos	IPA	final decision	No information given.	игӣӷнық
igiighsagh-	pos	IPA	to train physically; to work out (exercise)	No information given.	игӣҳсяӷ-
igiilluten	pos	IPA	behave yourself!; be nice!	particle	игӣльютын
igiilngagh-	pos	IPA	to avoid bumping or being hit; to mistreat; to travel near a certain area	"igiilngaghyughngaaghma tumet qellikat maligtanka ‘even though I wanted to travel (there), I followed the path that was  packed down’; ukagun igiilgngalta ‘let’s go this way’"	игӣлңаӷ-
igiilnguq* 	pos	IPA	straight path	No information given.	игӣлңуқ
igiisigalnguq*	pos	IPA	"stealthy, sneaky person"	No information given.	игӣсигалңуқ
igiisnayiite-	pos	IPA	to be sly; to be unpredictable in a threatening way; to be careless; to be untrustworthy	igiisnayiilnguq ‘a careless person’	игӣсньаӥӣты-
igiisniilnguq*	pos	IPA	"stealthy, sneaky person"	No information given.	игӣснӣлңуқ
igiitaghaq	pos	IPA	steady wind from any direction	igiitaghaaghsaaghaa wiin kelutmun qiivelta ‘lets turn toward the land in case the wind picks up’; aywaaneng igiitaghaq kaatuq ‘the wind is picking up from the north’	игӣтаӷақ
igiiterug-	pos	IPA	to behave well	"Kaviighhaam pii, “ii-ii pigpenang, qayngunwhaa igiiterugnaanghituten.” ‘The fox said to him, “oh-oh, you’d better not; you might do something awkward, not behave well.”’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:232)"	игӣтыруг-
igiitusigate-	pos	IPA	to be sneaky; to be underhanded	igiitusigalnguuk ‘the two that don’t deal honestly with each other’	игӣтусигаты-
igilngagh-	pos	IPA	to walk past something	apam igilngaamaa uqfik ‘grandfather walked past the tree’	игилңаӷ-
igkamsug-	pos	IPA	to stalk something	igkamsugvikaa mekelghiighem aqergiiq ‘the boy stalked the ptarmigan’; aghnaq igkamsukestaghaqeftuq ‘the lady was tiptoeing’; cf. iigkaghagh- ‘to sneak up on’	ихкамсюг-
iglag-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > iglagigh-, iglagiisit, iglagkestaaghhaat, iglagute-"	игляг-
iglagaaq	pos	IPA	edible smaller roots of the ground willow	No information given.	иглягāқ
iglagigh-	pos	IPA	"to untangle (hair, rope, etc.)"	iglagighaa aghnam nuyani ‘the woman untangled her hair’; iglagiitaa ‘he untangled something for her’	иглягиӷ-
iglagiisit	pos	IPA	comb with large teeth	No information given.	иглягӣсит
iglagkestaaghhaat	pos	IPA	comb with small teeth	No information given.	игляхкыстāҳāт
iglagllengiiq	pos	IPA	western sandpiper (Calidris mauri)	so called because it’s call sounds like a hoarse human voice	игляхльыңӣқ
iglaglluugte-	pos	IPA	get or be hoarse	iglaglluugtuq or iglaglluugtaa ‘he got hoarse’ /	игляхлью̄гты-
iglagrugtaagh-	pos	IPA	to yodel	No information given.	иглягрухтāӷ-
iglagtu-	pos	IPA	to have or use a loud voice	iglagtuluni ‘(speaking) in a loud voice’	игляхту-
iglagtunaasiq	pos	IPA	megaphone; microphone; public address system	No information given.	игляхтунāсиқ
iglagtusiq	pos	IPA	megaphone; microphone; public address system	No information given.	игляхтусиқ
iglagute-	pos	IPA	to tangle	iglagutuq ‘it got tangled’; iglagutaa ‘he tangled it’ /	иглягуты-
iglak	pos	IPA	voice; windpipe; throat	No information given.	игляк
iglakegte-	pos	IPA	to have a pleasant voice; to sing well	"iglakegtuq ‘he has a nice voice, sings well’; iglakegtaq ‘a person with a pleasant voice, one who sings well’"	иглякыхты-
iglalqughruk	pos	IPA	windpipe	No information given.	игляльқуӷрук
iglalqwaaq	pos	IPA	esophagus	No information given.	игляльқӱāқ
iglegha-	pos	IPA	to be traveling; to be running (of machinery)	igleghaaq ‘he is traveling’ or ‘it (machine) is running’	иглыӷа-
igleghalgun	pos	IPA	traveling companion	No information given.	иглыӷалгун
igleghasta	pos	IPA	traveler	No information given.	иглыӷаста
igleghavik	pos	IPA	trail; route	No information given.	иглыӷавик
igleghfik	pos	IPA	trail; route	No information given.	иглыҳфик
igleghte-	pos	IPA	to travel; to move; to go; to start	igleghtuq ‘he went traveling’ / igleghtem tagtalangani ‘in the course of his travels’; Ullghitagka igleghteslukek nuugtagka uusqallghanun. ‘I started up my wheeled/tracked vehicle and moved it to higher ground.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 58)	иглыҳты-
Igllutka	pos	IPA	site located to the west of Lake Nayvak (the lagoon where old Chaplino is at the eastern corner) in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Ихльютка
igu-	pos	IPA	to remove meat or other food from a pot after cooking	iguuq ‘she took meat out’; iwaa ‘she took it out ‘/ iwii ‘she took them out’; igutaa ‘she took meat out for him’; igutuq ‘she took meat out for herself’	игу-
igugh-	pos	IPA	to defend; to stick up for	igughaa ‘he defended her’ / igughiiq ‘he defended someone’; ighughivikamken ‘I defended someone against you’	игуӷ-
igughpagte-	pos	IPA	to jell rapidly	igughpagtuq or igughpagtaa ‘it jelled rapidly’ /	игуҳпахты-
igughqe-	pos	IPA	for rigor mortis to set in one	igughqaa ‘rigor mortis set in on him’ /	игуҳқы-
igughsaqneq	pos	IPA	one who always wants someone to defend him	No information given.	игуҳсяқньық
igughte-	pos	IPA	to jell; to congeal; to stiffen	igughtuq or igughtaa ‘it jelled’/ igughmelnguq ‘jelled thing’	игуҳты-
iguk	pos	IPA	testicle	No information given.	игук
igyawiste-	pos	IPA	to not have time	Chukotkan (R); piyaniighta igyawisimaa guunnaqelghii ‘the hunter ran out of time while he was about to shoot’	игьяӱисты-
ihi	pos	IPA	"expression of doubt, distrust or irony"	Chukotkan (R); particle	иьи
ihihihiy	pos	IPA	"expression of fright, surprise or suffering"	Chukotkan (R); particle	иьиьиьиӥ
ihihihiyagh-	pos	IPA	to groan	Chukotkan (R)	иьиьиьияӷ-
ihik	pos	IPA	just like that	"Chukotkan (R); particle; ihik ihik ihik aleghqwaa wata ‘just like that, just like that, just like that, talk more’"	иьик
"ii-i, ii-ii"	pos	IPA	"see, this is how it is; don’t do it (not now at least)"	"particle; used when showing how something is, or telling someone not to do something (now); ii-i pillugutefqaafsi ‘don’t  fight now you guys’"	"ӣ-и, ӣ-ӣ"
iiggae	pos	IPA	hand	"iiggeka ‘my hand’ (irreg., since not iigka); iigga or iiggenga ‘his hand’ (irreg., since not iiggnga); iiggit or iiggengit ‘their hands’ (irreg., since not iiggngit); my be used in the plural for a person's two hands or a single hand:  iiggenka ghuutii ‘my hands are cold’; iiggi ‘his hand(s)’; cf. iigge-; cf. iiggaq"	ӣхаы
iiggaq	pos	IPA	glove	iiggaqa ‘my glove’; iiggaa ‘his glove’; iiggiit ‘their gloves’; cf. iigga	ӣхақ
iigge-	pos	IPA	to dig	iigguq ‘he dug’; iiggaa ‘he dug it’ / iiggutaa ‘he dug for her’ or ‘he dug for it’; cf. iigga	ӣхы-
iiggeluughqe-	pos	IPA	to contaminate by touching	for example touching a bird's egg or animal's young so that the mother abandons it; iiggeluughqaa ‘he contaminated it’ /	ӣхылю̄ҳқы-
iiggereghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to dig for artifacts	No information given.	ӣхырыӷӱāӷ-
iigh-	pos	IPA	to hide	iightuq ‘he hid’; iighaa ‘he hid it’ / iighaq ‘hidden thing’; iighvik ‘hiding place’; iighaghtughaa ‘he hid her (from her enemies)’ or ‘he kept it hidden’’	ӣӷ-
iighaate-	pos	IPA	to play hide-and-seek	No information given.	ӣӷāты-
"iighagh-, iighaghllug-"	pos	IPA	to get or have a swollen gland	No information given.	"ӣӷаӷ-, ӣӷаҳльюг-"
iighaq	pos	IPA	swollen gland in neck or side of face; side of neck near lower part of jaw	No information given.	ӣӷақ
iigharaagh-	pos	IPA	to play hide-and-seek	Chukotkan	ӣӷарāӷ-
iighhaata	pos	IPA	loop of walrus hide	Chukotkan (R)	ӣҳāта
iighhaq*	pos	IPA	string story; cat's cradle	No information given.	ӣҳақ
iighhwaange-	pos	IPA	to feel very frustrated; to have a hard time from frustration	iighhwaanguq ‘he is feeling very frustrated’ / taghnughhiita iighhwaangestaat ‘her children made the woman have a hard time’; iighhwaangutii taghnughhani ‘she is feeling very frustrated over her children’	ӣҳӱāңы-
iighsiigh-	pos	IPA	to use a hoist on	iighsiiqaghluku ayveghput qaakaghput ‘we pulled our walrus up onto the elevated place by using a hoist on it’	ӣҳсӣӷ-
iighsugh-	pos	IPA	to hoist with rope	iighsughtuq ‘he hoisted something’; iighsughaa ‘he hoisted it’ / iighsuutet or iighsughvik ‘block and tackle or other hoisting apparatus’	ӣҳсюӷ-
iighsuun	pos	IPA	rope on pulley	No information given.	ӣҳсӯн
iightaghwaaghet	pos	IPA	heavy-duty chain	Chukotkan (R); this is a plural used for one chain	ӣҳтаӷӱāӷыт
iighw-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > iighwigh-, iighwite-"	ӣӷӱ-
iighwaghtute-	pos	IPA	to lie around	Chukotkan (V&E)	ӣӷӱаҳтуты-
iighwigh-	pos	IPA	to become whole	iighwightuq (iighwighluni) ‘it became whole’ / iighwightaa (iighwighlluku) ‘he made it whole’	ӣӷӱиӷ-
iighwilkaaq	pos	IPA	medium size cake of ice	cf. iighwilnguq; see item 14 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ӣӷӱилькāқ
iighwilnguq*	pos	IPA	large size cake of ice; whole thing	may have some pressure ridges but no bumps; cf. iighwilkaaq	ӣӷӱилңуқ
iighwite-	pos	IPA	to be whole; to not have given birth (yet)	iighwituq ‘it is whole’ or  ‘she hasn’t given birth (yet)’ / iighwilnguq ‘whole thing’	ӣӷӱиты-
iighwte-	pos	IPA	to sip a liquid; for tide to go down or out; for tide to wash (it) out	iighwtuq ‘he sipped’ or ‘the tide went out’; iighwtaa ‘he sipped it’ or ‘the tide washed it out’ / cf. iikw	ӣҳӱты-
iighwziig-	pos	IPA	to inhale; for waves to go out	iighwziigtuq ‘he inhaled’ or ‘the waves went out’ / qagit iighwziillghit iknaqepigtut ‘the pull of the waves going out is strong’	ӣӷӱзӣг-
iigkaghagh-	pos	IPA	to sneak up on; to tiptoe to; to creep up to	cf. igkamsug- ‘to stalk’	ӣхкаӷаӷ-
iigkutaq	pos	IPA	rake for use on grass	No information given.	ӣхкутақ
iigna 	pos	IPA	that one over there; the one in an east or west direction	"restricted demonstrative pronoun; base is ing-; although the absolutive singular pronoun has g, the ng of the base can be seen in most of the forms here; singular relative pronoun: ingum ‘(of) the one over there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: iingkut ‘those over there’; vocative: iingyuq ‘you, over there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tazigna ‘that one over there’; localis adverb: ingani ‘over there’; terminalis adverb: ingavek ‘to over there’; vialis adverb: iing'ggun ‘through over there’; ablative adverb: iingken ‘from over there’; interjectional: inga ‘there (over there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tazingani ‘there, over there’"	ӣгна
iigsagh-	pos	IPA	"to go digging (as for artifacts, auklets aged underground, or other buried items)"	iigsaghtuq ‘he went digging’ /	ӣхсяӷ-
iigtugh-	pos	IPA	to dig with intensity	iigtughtuq ‘he reallly dug’; iigtughaa ‘he really dug it’ / = iitugh-	ӣхтуӷ-
iikaaq	pos	IPA	merganser (Mergus spp.)	No information given.	ӣкāқ
iikaghagh-1	pos	IPA	to tiptoe	Chukotkan; iikaghaghtuq ‘he is tiptoeing’; iikaghaghaa ‘he is tiptoeing up to it’ /	ӣкаӷаӷ-1
iikaghagh-2	pos	IPA	to suddenly come undone; to come off by accident	iikaghaghtuq ‘it came off accidently’	ӣкаӷаӷ-2
iike-	pos	IPA	to remove; to unfasten	"iikuq ‘it came undone’; iikaa ‘he removed it’ / iikiiq ‘he removed something’; iikeneq, iikelleq ‘a little piece removed from something’; iikaq ‘a large piece’; Tuguluku ellngaan, meteghlluk iikituq papegmi melqwaneng, yataaghqesqaa teghla. ‘Taking the sooty lamp residue, the raven removed one of his tail-feathers, and told the owl to get ready.’ (AANGHHAQ 27)"	ӣкы-
iikiiqaq	pos	IPA	large flat slice of something	Chukotkan (R)	ӣкӣқақ
iikna	pos	IPA	that one across or over there or to the south or east	"restricted demonstrative pronoun; base is  ik-; singular relative pronoun: ikum (of) the one across there; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: ikegkut those across there; vocative: iiksuq you, across there; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tazikna that one across there; localis adverb: ikani across there; terminalis adverb: ikavek to across there; vialis adverb: ikagun through across there; ablative adverb: ikegken from across there; interjectional: ika there (across there)!; anaphoric localis adverb: tazikani there, across there"	ӣкньа
iiksigh-	pos	IPA	for a piece of ice to partially detach from shore ice; to begin to detach	No information given.	ӣксиӷ-
iiksiin1	pos	IPA	a detached piece of ice	No information given.	ӣксӣн1
iiksiin2	pos	IPA	bracelet	Chukotkan; questioned	ӣксӣн2
iikw	pos	IPA	low tide	"see also iiw-, the verbal counterpart of this base"	ӣкӱ
iilleq	pos	IPA	slime; mud	Chukotkan (R)	ӣльық
iilngigh-	pos	IPA	to lose or extract a front tooth	iilngightuq ‘he lost a front tooth’; iilngighaa ‘he pulled her front tooth’ /	ӣлңиӷ-
iilngiq	pos	IPA	gap left by a lost tooth in the front of the mouth	No information given.	ӣлңиқ
iilqayagute-	pos	IPA	to give up on	iilqayagutaa ‘he gave up on it’; cf. iilqayug-	ӣльқаягуты-
iilqayug-	pos	IPA	to give up (and quit); to give up hope	iilqayugtuq ‘he gave up or was reluctant to continue’ or ‘he gave up hope’ / 	ӣльқаюг-
iilqayugigate-	pos	IPA	to be perseverant	No information given.	ӣльқаюгигаты-
iilqayuke-	pos	IPA	to lack faith in (it)	iilqayukaa ‘he doesn't have much faith in it’ / 	ӣльқаюкы-
iilqe-	pos	IPA	to become sad	iilquq ‘he got sad’ / iilqutkaa ‘he got sad about it’	ӣльқы-
iilqupak	pos	IPA	mucus from eye	cf. iilquq	ӣльқупак
iilquq	pos	IPA	brain	"Esghaghhunguq uyghak taana iilquvleghaghllaguyaghtuq. ‘You see, they say, there used to be a lot of brain matter on that rock (where people would kill themselves).’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:166)"	ӣльқуқ
iilqwaaq	pos	IPA	spinal cord	No information given.	ӣльқӱāқ
iilvagh-	pos	IPA	to elevate; to honor; to hoist	iilvaghaa ‘he elevated it’ /	ӣлваӷ-
iime-	pos	IPA	to develop a hollow or depression	"iimuq ‘it developed a depression’ / iimtaa or iimestaa ‘he made a depression in it’, ‘he dented it’"	ӣмы-
iimgutaq	pos	IPA	tobacco pouch or similar rolled-up container	No information given.	ӣмгутақ
iimna	pos	IPA	that aforementioned one known to both speaker and listener; that one in an undetermined place away from here	"obscured demonstrative pronoun; base is  im-; relative singular pronoun: imum ‘(of) that one’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: iimkut ‘those’; vocative: Iimyuq ‘You (omnipresent but not visible; God)’ (used in some prayers); anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tazimna ‘that one’; localis adverb: imani ‘there, at that place or time’; terminalis adverb: imavek ‘to that place or time’; vialis adverb: imagun or iimgun ‘through that place or time’; ablative adverb: imaken or iimken ‘from that place or time’; interjectional: ima there!; anaphoric localis adverb: tazimani ‘there, at that place or time’; tagitugmun pulaluni tazimavek igleghsimalghi ‘when he got in to fog, he just went in random directions’; iimken ima taakut liilightuusaagut ‘they are rules from before the present time’; naken imaken allgeghtaqaak ullghitagni ‘he got his snowmachine from some place’; cf. ima, imukun"	ӣмна
iimnanguq	pos	IPA	once upon a time	particle; traditional opening word of stories	ӣмнаңуқ
iimnga-	pos	IPA	to have a depression in it	"iimngauq ‘it has a depression in it’, ‘it is dented’"	ӣмңа-
iimra	pos	IPA	solid matter in broth from boiled meat; slush; mud	"the ‘slush, mud’  meaning may be Chukotkan only"	ӣмра
Iingghilukaq	pos	IPA	"site in Chukotka, on Ittygran Island"	see Map 3 in Appendices	Ӣңӷилюкақ
iinghusalek	pos	IPA	rule to ensure safety	"Iinghusalguftuq wataghllak iiwhlanghani taan’gavek ateghyaqunaki pisqellelek, ulefqaghtekayuguniluku sukatepiglluni. ‘There was a rule never to go down there when the tide was very low as then the tide came in it would come in very fast.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:236); Emta iinghusalek, uglaneghmiininguq nenga ughumakayuguniluku piiqaat enkaam kelengasaalluni ayuquq. ‘There was a hunting rule about them too because when there were lots of them together, the ice on which they had been roosting would thaw and get thin.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:134)"	ӣнӷусялык
iinghute-	pos	IPA	to warn	iinghutaa ‘he warned him’ /	ӣнӷуты-
iingkut	pos	IPA	those over there	look under iigna	ӣңкут
iinglu	pos	IPA	neighboring semi-subterranian house	Chukotkan (V&E)	ӣңлю
iingqaghyagh-	pos	IPA	to catch by hooking	No information given.	ӣңқаӷьяӷ-
iingqaq*	pos	IPA	gum (anatomical)	iingqaghten ‘your gums’	ӣңқақ
iingqighte-	pos	IPA	to stab through a sea mammal’s eye to kill it 	"suvlugiilluku ayumiq ilangi teghikusam tawaten iingqighlluki tuqutaqegkangit ‘without (using) a gun on it, in the past they would kill some sea mammal like that by stabbing them through the eye’; neghsaq iingqighlluku tuqusimaa ‘he killed the seal by stabbing it through the eye’"	ӣңқиҳты-
iingqiq	pos	IPA	louse nit	No information given.	ӣңқиқ
iingtaq	pos	IPA	moulted goose	iingtaghyaghtuq ‘he went hunting for moulted geese’	ӣңтақ
iingte-	pos	IPA	to moulted	iingtuq ‘it moulted’ /	ӣңты-
iingunagh-	pos	IPA	whole; all; every	"used in the quantifier/qualifier construction;  iingunaan neghaqa ‘I ate it all’; iingunaghmelnguq ‘the whole thing’; igleghtut iingunaghmeng ‘they all traveled’; ingunaghhaghmi kaatuq ‘every single one of them arrived’; Aghneq iingunaan qepghanemni, qenwat meghnughaqunga. ‘Every day when I work I am tired.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 68)"	ӣңунаӷ-
iinqe-	pos	IPA	"to coo to a child; to say the customary made-up words, nonsense phrases, etc., used for that particular child to that child"	iinqaa ‘he cooed to him’ / iinqiiq ‘he cooed to someone’; iinqelluku iqengestaa ‘by cooing to him she made him smile’	ӣнқы-
iinqisiq	pos	IPA	the customary made-up words spoken to a particular child; cooing words or song	#NAME?	ӣнқисиқ
iinqun	pos	IPA	the customary made-up words spoken to a particular child; cooing words or song	#NAME?	ӣнқун
Iintiyaghmii	pos	IPA	American Indian	No information given.	Ӣнтияӷмӣ
iinwaaq	pos	IPA	foothill; hillock	iinwaaghmun kaviiq mayughaghsan guutaa ‘when the fox went up the hillock he shot it’; iinwaaghmeng estumalghii ‘he slid down the little hill’	ӣнӱāқ
iipgite-	pos	IPA	to be dull	"iipgilnguq ‘dull knife, needle, etc.’"	ӣпхиты-
iipkegsighwaagh-	pos	IPA	to tell jokes	Chukotkan (R)	ӣпкыхсиӷӱāӷ-
iiqmig-	pos	IPA	to put something in the mouth without eating it	cf. iqa	ӣқмиг-
iiqmik	pos	IPA	something held inside the mouth in the cheek; sugar cube	No information given.	ӣқмик
iiqwaq	pos	IPA	walrus meat and skin aged in underground cellar	No information given.	ӣқӱақ
iiskak	pos	IPA	kidney	iiskagegka or iiskagenka ‘my kidneys’	ӣскак
iiskegte-	pos	IPA	"to have good eyes, good eyesight"	"Iiskegtekuvek iingunaghmi yugusin nighugllagullequq, iwernga iyellugmeskuvek iingunaghmi yugusin mamlegllagullequq. ‘If you have good eyes, your entire body will be full of light, but if you have bad eyes your entire body will be full of darkness.’ (Matthew 6.22-23)"	ӣскыҳты-
iiskughte-	pos	IPA	to guard; to watch out for	"iiskughtaa ‘he is guarding it, he is watching out for her’ / iiskughtiiq ‘he is standing guard’"	ӣскуҳты-
iiskughtista	pos	IPA	watchman; guard	No information given.	ӣскуҳтиста
iisqaghmig-	pos	IPA	to put (it) on one's shoulder	iisqaghmigaa ‘he put it on his shoulder’ /	ӣсқаӷмиг-
iisqaghmiitaq	pos	IPA	yoke (as for carrying water in buckets)	No information given.	ӣсқаӷмӣтақ
iisqaq	pos	IPA	area of body around top of shoulders and back of neck	"used in the dual, iisqak, for that body area"	ӣсқақ
iisqiighute-	pos	IPA	to slump down; to let one’s shoulders droop	peng’gem elngaatall iisqiighutuq ‘he slumped down due to worry’	ӣсқӣӷуты-
iisqugh-	pos	IPA	intimidated; hesitant to look another in the eye; considerate of the feelings of others; self-conscious	"emotional root; iisqughyugtuq ‘he feels hesitant to look someone in the face, feels intimidated’; iisqughyukaa ‘he feels intimidated by him’; iisqughnaghtuq ‘he is feared, intimidating’; iisqughyughqaa ‘he made her feel intimidated’; mekelghiiq iisqughyugigalnguq ilani algumastekluni neghelghii ‘the boy ate without regarding the feelings of others and thus made his companions (who weren’t eating) covetous (of what he was eating)’; iisqughyugtaat ilangit esghapagtuulluku ‘they made him self-conscious when they stared at him’; aleni kayunneghisan iisquqaa ‘when his companion didn’t catch fish he was considerate of him (and gave him some fish)’"	ӣсқуӷ-
iisqughte-	pos	IPA	to get a foreign object in one's eye	iisqughtuq ‘he got something in his eye’ / aghnaghaghhaq iisqughtuq pagulameng ‘the little girl got dust in her eye’; cf. iya	ӣсқуҳты-
iisqughun	pos	IPA	foreign object in eye	"Sangan esghaghsigu yulgutegpek iisqughutnga, elpek katam iisqughuten unaghsighllak avelghaghluku? ‘Why do you notice the [tiny] thing in the eye of your fellow person, while missing the thing in your own eye, though it be a large piece of wood?’ (Matthew 7.3)"	ӣсқуӷун
iitegngam	pos	IPA	usually; always; anyway	particle; iitegngam aqupileghyugnaanghituq ‘he usually doesn't feel obligated’	ӣтыгңам
iitek	pos	IPA	at least; sure; alright; still; but on the other hand	"particle; expresses mild assent after insistence or an adverse condition; iitek, taawa ataasiq nuluq ‘at least there is one teabag’; Pimakanga uyughani, ""Iitek tazinga aghnangusimayaghamken.” ‘She said to her younger brother, “At least now I’ve found a woman for you.”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 160); Quyngim ivalungi amestaaghhaaluki qiipiluki tespagavek atuqaqut. Aghveghem pingi qayughllak ilangi, iitek ilangi taaqegkayuget amestaaghhaaluki. ‘They used reindeer sinew making it into a thin thread. Whale sinew (was used) too, but on the other hand it (the reindeer sinew) could be made thin.’ (SIVUQ. NANGEGH. 1:96); Whanga liitellemni sangwaa maana maaten atughput ukavansaghtuq. Iitek allgeghluni ayuquq, taawanginaq ukavanteftuq. ‘When I was gaining awareness, the kind of clothing we wear nowadays was scarce. It did come in all right, but it was in short supply.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)"	ӣтык
"iitekqun, iitegqun"	pos	IPA	perhaps; usually	particle	ӣтыкқун; ӣтыхқун
iitga	pos	IPA	crack or lead at shore edge of shorefast ice caused by vertical movement of the floating ice	"Tuvam ukani uughqan tungangani, laagha taakwna iitgameng aatqeftuq. ‘Here, in the sheltered area of the shorefast ice, its water goes out from the seaside lead.’ (SIKU. ESLA. ESGHA. 2004:32)"	ӣтха
iitghiitaq	pos	IPA	pole located above bed-curtain in winter traditional house 	Chukotkan (R)	ӣтҳӣтақ
iitghute-	pos	IPA	to bring in forcefully	No information given.	ӣтҳуты-
iitqiinagh-	pos	IPA	to just drop in (as for a short visit)	temngi iitqiinaghlunga piinga ‘I just came in for a short visit’; aatkani aghipalnguut iitqiinaghluni mataghqughii ‘he took off his wet clothes as soon as he came in’	ӣтқӣнаӷ-
iitugh-	pos	IPA	to dig with intensity	Chukotkan; iitughtuq ‘he really dug’; iitughaa ‘he really dug it’ / = iigtugh-	ӣтуӷ-
iivagh-	pos	IPA	to fade away in the distance	"Naayghaghhaq sukalluni aliighaqsalghii, imanguq aywaaghhneghani iivaghaqelghii. ‘They could see the Gambell mountain grow bigger (literally, rapidly become visible), but when the north wind came up, they would see the mountain shrink again.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:118); cf. iivani"	ӣваӷ-
iivani	pos	IPA	in the area at the limit of one's hearing; afar; in the far distance	particle; yugayu iivanlluni qalghiitiiq ‘the loon sang a song from afar’; cf. iivagh-	ӣвани
Iivgaaq	pos	IPA	site in Chukotka near Sireniki	see Map 2 in Appendices	Ӣвгāқ
iivghaan	pos	IPA	spectacled eider (Somateria fischeri)	No information given.	ӣвӷāн
iiw-	pos	IPA	for tide to go down	"iiwhtuq ‘the tide went down’; iikwan aghvighllequkut ‘we'll cross when the tide gets low’; Iinghusalguftuq wataghllak iiwhlanghani taan’gavek ateghyaqunaki pisqellelek, ulefqaghtekayuguniluku sukatepiglluni. ‘There was a rule never to go down there when the tide was very low as when the tide came in it would come in very fast.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:236); see also iikw; cf. iighwte-"	ӣӱ-
iiwen	pos	IPA	just when; once again; subsequently; then; also; still; or else	"particle; iiwen aghsaghtughaqaa, sama angyat kaateqeghsimalghiit ‘just when it was close to morning, the boat finally came’; saaftegpenaan, iiwen aghyughlleqamken ‘don't touch it or else I'll punish you’; iiwenllu tengegkayuget kaasaghtughaqut tagitugughtaa ‘just when the plane was about to arrive it got foggy’; akuwaaghhaaneng iiwen unugaqaa igaqenka taaqegpenaki ‘since the other day once again it became night before I could finish my paperwork’; Maaten liisalghiinga, Tapghaaghaghqun, iiwen siqineq tevighyaghtuughaquq tamlagtukut. ‘Then, as I’ve learned, just when the sun was about to set we beached at Tapghaaghaq.’ (SIVUQ. NANGEGH. 2:162); Iiwen, Qateghyiighaghhaay, meghtanghilkuvek, ighsakuvek, tuqulluten, gaaghluten, neghelleqamken. ‘Or else, little birdy, if you don’t fetch water, if you refuse, then after killing you and cooking you I’ll eat you.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 32)"	ӣӱын
iiwenllu	pos	IPA	just when	particle;  Iiwenllu quulngughutanga aghneq lliighaquq naayghamun qaygeghsimalghiit. ‘And just then when it became noon they got the top of the mountain.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 23)	ӣӱынлью
iiwenngam	pos	IPA	if it is so	particle	ӣӱынңам
iiwenqun	pos	IPA	just when	particle	ӣӱынқун
iiwleng	pos	IPA	every time; all the time; always; repeatedly	"particle;  tagineghmini iiwleng nenglaghtaqiinkut ‘every time he comes over he makes us laugh’; taana iiwleng kinguteghllak ‘he is always very late’; tagiiqelghii uksustaghhiinaghmi iiwleng ‘he comes only in winter all the time’; Liilightuusaq taana, uyiiteng quunpeng uughqan tunganganilluki iiwleng pisqellelget. Qayughllak ayumiq nanghiiqaalghiit, yuget ayveghmun nusugniiqiit uyiighqun iglakaqat. ‘That law is that the harpoon rope must be on the south side at all times. Because they experienced it long ago, they said men who have become entangled by the rope were pulled into the water.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:128); Iiwleng upenghaanneghagu pangeghtaqelghiikut. ‘All the time, when it became spring, we would go to Chukotka.’ (PANGEGH. 48)"	ӣӱлың
iiyaq	pos	IPA	ventilator; air vent	"aagram iiyaa ‘ventilator in the aagra, the inner room of traditional Chukchi-style Eskimo house’; Atalgukaghaan aghnneghani iiyaa qelpeghlluku aaptaqegkanga, ""Unguvaaghaqsiin?"" ‘Whenever dawn came his little cousin would open its ventilator and ask him, “Are you still alive?” (AYUM. UNGIP. III:18)"	ӣяқ
iiyngite-	pos	IPA	to be eyeless; to be blind	No information given.	ӣӥңиты-
iiyvaraak	pos	IPA	hollow sick eyes; one with hollow sick eyes	No information given.	ӣӥварāк
ikavziiq	pos	IPA	type of stitch	exact identification undetermined	икавзӣқ
ikayugh-	pos	IPA	to respond (positively) to; to go along or agree with; to help	ikayughaa ‘he responded to her’ /	икаюӷ-
ikayuqu-	pos	IPA	to help; to be helpful	anengani ullghitangllalghii ikayuqwaa ‘he helped his brother who was working on the snow-machine’; navek pinalutek aleni ikayuqwaa ‘he helped his friend so that they could go somewhere’; luuraq salguyaaghtuq ikayuquteggu ‘maybe he’s got something going on with him; help him’	икаю-
ike-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > iike-, ikelleq, ikugh-, ikute-, ikuvike-"	икы-
"ikelleq, iikelleq"	pos	IPA	"fragment of ice, meat, etc."	No information given.	"икыльық, ӣкыльық"
ikevaaneq	pos	IPA	prolonged south wind	No information given.	икывāнық
ikevaghlluk	pos	IPA	south; southeast; south wind; southeast wind	No information given.	икываҳльюк
ikevaq	pos	IPA	south; southeast; south wind; southeast wind	No information given.	икывақ
ikevreghaak	pos	IPA	southward current	No information given.	икыврыӷāк
ikfiqe-	pos	IPA	to have intense pain; to feel anguish; to be anxious; to long for or miss another	"ikfiquq ‘he is in great pain’; ikfiqutkaa ‘he is anguished over it’  or ‘he really longs for her’ / ikfiqumalghii ‘one who has been having physical or mental pain, or has been in need’"	икфиқы-
ikfiqnaghhalek	pos	IPA	how anxiety provoking!; how awesome!; how wonderful!	particle	икфиқньаҳалык
iki	pos	IPA	impossible!; in no circumstances	"Chukotkan(R);  iki umegneghmi aghulaqegpenang, iflalngwaaghllequten ‘see (negative), don’t leave in the storm, you will get lost’"	ики
ikigh-	pos	IPA	open	postural root;  ikightuq ‘it opened’; ikightaa ‘he opened it’; ikighngaaq it is open’; ikighmi ‘(it) being open’	икиӷ-
ikighllineq	pos	IPA	opening in ice pushed up in pressure ridge or in the ground; crevice in sea ice; cave; gully	see item 17 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	икиҳльинық
ikiifsin	pos	IPA	at last; finally	"particle; ikiifsin aglaghyaghtughtuq ‘at last he's about to go home’; Ikiifsinnguq nemnni samani Sivuqaghhaghmi tawaten uniiliqeghllagluta qutengeqaghhnemta taghyiighaqsaghtukut. ‘Down in Gambell, when we finally came ashore after a long ordeal at sea, we would remove the salt.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:126)"	икӣфсин
ikiite-	pos	IPA	to disappear (of a person)	"ayumiq navek piluteng navengiighhaqlu aviitngwaaqat ikiinniiqegkangit ‘in olden days they would say of those who had gone somewhere far away and just vanished, that they had disappeared’; naqam ilangi naten uteghniqayuget ikiitkat ‘sometimes the ones who disappeared would return somehow’"	икӣты-
ikiki	pos	IPA	under no circumstances; one should not  	Chukotkan (R); particle	икики
ikiqun	pos	IPA	but yet; but already; but on the other hand; and still yet; but wait until; but already	"particle; Whaten igaghyami ikiqun uglaghllak whangkuta teacher-kegkaqenghilkefut. Nulighqutiinalghiit. Maatenllu teacher-eghllagughlleghhii. ‘But when we were going to school, there were so many of us students who had just a teacher and his wife. Right now, there are many teachers in the school.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:96); Taawa tesamani tepluni angyaghpallugem ingluvingha. Taawa quuguluni qalqalimaqulleghtuftuq. Quukluku taana. Tamaa telaanangam sangi, napaghyii sanighyaghwaaghi. Ikiqun quyngighqwaaghet angaghquqaqeftiit. ‘There, the great big old ship’s wreckage washed ashore. There was wood that they chopped. It was used for firewood, the sail halyards and masts. But already, the reindeer herders had been hauling it away.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)"	икиқун
ikivaaneq	pos	IPA	slight south wind 	Chukotkan (R)	икиванық
ikiwan	pos	IPA	if they can or if it can happen to them (then we could or it could happen to us); it can happen to others too; even them/him	"particle; Naagumi ikiwan qaaynganilnguum nateghqameggnun angighhutaqegkanginkut. ‘Even us he rubs onto sole material from above [as if we were dirt].’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 43); Whangkutallu taakut ikiwan aklungilnguut, Tanengankut. ‘Our (hosts) too even they were pretty well off, Tanenga and family’ (PANGEGH. 8)"	икиӱан
iklagrugte-	pos	IPA	to be somewhat clear up; to clean somewhat	esla iklagrugtaa ‘the weather has cleared up somewhat; taghnughhaghmi gginaa ikloagrugtaa ‘she tidied up her baby’s face’	икльягрухты-
iklagte-	pos	IPA	to clean; to wash; to tidy up	aatkami ilangi iklagtii iqangi aghvigluki ‘she cleaned some of her clothing washing it’; iigmi aawi iklaglluki alla peghhinqigtuq ‘she wiped the blood from her hands and then wiped them again’	икльяхты-
iklungigh-	pos	IPA	to insure; to safeguard	No information given.	икльюңиӷ-
iknaqe-	pos	IPA	to be strong (in any sense)	iknaquq ‘he or it is strong’ / iknaqsugnetun ‘with a strong will’	икньақы-
iknaqsuugte-	pos	IPA	to feel stronger after an illness; to act as if one is stronger than others	No information given.	икньақсю̄хты-
iknaqughi-	pos	IPA	to become stronger	Elngaatall Pinaayam iknaqughiniyaghaa taana Petgenghhaq. ‘Pinaaya said that that Petgenghhaq was becoming very strong.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:10)	икньақуӷи-
iksaak	pos	IPA	ice creeper	Chukotka (R); made of bone or metal; cf. kiksak	икся̄к
iksiin	pos	IPA	strap ice creeper to footwear	Chukotka (R)	иксӣн
iksiisigh-	pos	IPA	to attach ice creeper to footwear	Chukokan (R)	иксӣсиӷ-
ikufkagh-	pos	IPA	to quickly cut off a small piece; to cut off a small piece immediately	No information given.	икуфкаӷ-
ikufkaq	pos	IPA	small piece that has been cut off	No information given.	икуфкақ
ikugh-	pos	IPA	to remove; to cut off	"ikughtuq ‘it removed things, he cut off pieces’; ikughaa ‘he removed it’ /"	икуӷ-
ikumla-	pos	IPA	to be okay; to be acceptable; to be suitable	ikumlallghaneng unaghsim saghnalta quugkameng ‘let’s gather the most suitable wood as firewood’; ikumlalleghqek ullghitagma enraq naavuk ‘my better snow-machine broke’	икумля-
ikute-	pos	IPA	to cut off a piece (for)	ikutaa ‘he cut off a piece for her ‘/	икуты-
ikuvike-	pos	IPA	to cut off a piece (from)	ikuvikaa ‘he cut off a piece from it’ /	икувикы-
ikuyegmig-	pos	IPA	to bump or nudge with one's elbow	ikuyegmigaa ‘he bumped or nudged her with his elbow’ /	икуӥыгмиг-
ikuyegtaagh-	pos	IPA	to lean on one's elbow	ikuyegtaaghtuq ‘he leaned on his elbow’ /	икуӥыхтāӷ-
ikuyegvike-	pos	IPA	to put one's elbow on (it)	ikuyegvikaa ‘he put his elbow on it’ /	икуӥыгвикы-
ikuyek	pos	IPA	elbow	ikuska ‘my elbow’; ikuygegka ‘my elbows’	икуӥык
Ikuygek	pos	IPA	Ikoygak Cr. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Икуӥгык
ikwaaqu	pos	IPA	crosswind (stronger wind coming off cliffs or high mountains when a wind blows against them)	anuqmi ikwaaqum repall qawaaget meghmun ifkaghtaqii tengaalghiit ‘in the wind a crosswind with force makes the flying birds fall into the water’; ikwaaqum pennani repall meq pightuquqluku ‘the crosswind at the cliffs forcefully acts on the water like a blizzard’	икӱāқу
ikwegte-	pos	IPA	to scratch (long) on the face	taghnughhaam ilani gginaakun ikwegsimakanga ‘the child scratched his companion on the face’; nulighhan yuuk qungyaghluni ikwegsimaa ‘the man got jealous and scratched his wife on the face’	икӱыхты-
ila	pos	IPA	part; relative; friend; one of; some of	yugem qikmiin ilangat ‘one of the man’s dogs’; yugem qikmiin ilangit ‘some of the man’s dogs’; ilanka ‘my relatives’ or ‘my group’; mangtegham ilanga ‘part of the house’	иля
ila-	pos	IPA	to add something to (it)	ilaa ‘he added something to it’	иля-
ilaagh-	pos	IPA	to patch	ilaaghaa ‘he patched it’ / ilaaghiiq ‘he patched something’	иля̄ӷ-
ilaaq	pos	IPA	patch	No information given.	иля̄қ
ilagaan	pos	IPA	hymn; song; shaman's song	No information given.	илягāн
ilagaatet	pos	IPA	hymnal; songs; phonograph record; CD	No information given.	илягāтыт
ilagagh-	pos	IPA	to sing	ilagaghtuq ‘he sang’ / ilagaataa ‘he sang to her’; ilagaatkaa ‘he sang about it’	илягаӷ-
ilakaghqaq	pos	IPA	something to be added or included	No information given.	илякаҳқақ
ilakumtaaq	pos	IPA	friend	No information given.	илякумтāқ
ilakwaaq	pos	IPA	clan member; kinsman; member of the same group	No information given.	илякӱāқ
ilaligh-	pos	IPA	to supplement	No information given.	"илялиӷ,"
ilaliigh-	pos	IPA	to make friends	ilaliighaa ‘he made friends with him’ / ilaliighutuq ‘he became friends (with them)’	илялӣӷ-
ilamghi-	pos	IPA	to want more	ilamghiiq ‘he wants more’ / ilamghitkaa ‘he wants more of it’	илямӷи-
ilangakun	pos	IPA	sometimes	particle	иляңакун
ilangani	pos	IPA	meanwhile; some of the time	particle	иляңани
ilangghama-	pos	IPA	be good-natured	Chukotkan (R)	иляңӷāма-
ilangghiite-	pos	IPA	to not talk	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	илаңӷӣты-
ilangqughqu-	pos	IPA	to get ice to melt for water	ilangqughquuq ‘he got ice to melt for water’ /	иляңқуҳқу-
ilangqughrag-	pos	IPA	to get coated or covered with ice	ilangqughragtuq or ilangqughragaa ‘it got coated or covered with ice’ /	иляңқуӷраг-
ilangqughrak	pos	IPA	coating of ice	No information given.	иляңқуӷрак
ilangqughsiigh-	pos	IPA	to get ice to melt for water	ilangqughsiightuq ‘he is getting or chipping ice to make water’ / ilangqughsiighyaghnaqunga naayvamun ‘I’m going to the lake to get ice for making water’	иляңқуҳсӣӷ-
ilangquq	pos	IPA	clear chunk of fresh-water ice	ilangqughregaq ‘small chunk of fresh-water ice’	иляңқуқ
ilangsiniigh-	pos	IPA	to look for more; to try to get more	"angyat ilangsiniighumaghmeng kelutmiighhlluteng alla ayveghaghlaataghtut ‘the boat went out hunting for walrus looking for more’; ilangsiniighnaqem muluughtukut ‘on account of being about to look for more, we stayed out longer’"	иляңсинӣӷ-
ilapga-	pos	IPA	to comply with; to respond to; to help	ilapgaa ‘he responded to him’ / ilapgatuq ‘he is responding’	иляпха-
ilaraagh-	pos	IPA	to stretch the news; to exaggerate	ungipaq qenwat ilaraaghem allaanghughsimaaq ‘on account of exaggeration the news was altered’; ilaraaghnguq pininghituq ‘exaggeration is not good’	иляря̄ӷ-
ilarngughte-	pos	IPA	to reduce something; to lesson	usikaghqaghten ilarngughhnaqanka uglaapigtut ‘your load is too much so I’ll lesson it’; angyam megha ilarngughlluku kuuvnakesi ‘bail out some of the water from the boat’	илярңуҳты-
ilataa-	pos	IPA	to join with others; to go along	tengegkayugkun ifkalghiikun ilataamalghii ‘he joined the others who went by plane’; Ungazightatgun ilataaguq ‘he had joined the group that went to Chaplino’	илятā-
ilate-	pos	IPA	to add in; to join in	ilatuq ‘he joined in’; ilataa ‘he added it in’ / ilatutut ‘they joined the others’; ilatutuutut ‘they joined together’; ilatkaq ‘someone or something added in’	иляты-
ilefkaate-	pos	IPA	to come loose (from being tied)	qikmiq ilefkaatuq ‘the dog got loose’	илыакāты-
ilefkaghagh-	pos	IPA	to suddenly come undone or off	nagtuqaa atkuyaaghan ilefkaghaghtuq ‘the button on her dress suddenly came off’	илыфкаӷаӷ-
ileme-	pos	IPA	to come undone; to come untied	ilemuq ‘it came undone’ / ilemtaa ‘he undid it’; = iteme-	илымы-
ilemquusiq	pos	IPA	screwdriver; bent awl	No information given.	илымқӯсиқ
ilepenghaaq	pos	IPA	inner membrane of walrus or bearded seal intestine	ighneghllugem ilepenghaaghi kelighaghaqii ‘she is scraping off the inner membrane of the intestine’	илыпынӷāқ
ilepesuwaq	pos	IPA	layer	Chukotkan (R)	илыпысюӱақ
ilepghaaghek 	pos	IPA	pants of reindeer-skin with the fur side in	No information given.	илыпгҳāӷык
ilghaghteq	pos	IPA	walrus sleeping in water on its back	Chukotkan (R)	илӷаҳтық
ilighaq	pos	IPA	patch put inside sole of boot loosely	No information given.	илиӷақ
ilu	pos	IPA	inside; interior; inner organs; inner feelings; heart (figuratively)	ilungani ‘inside it’	илю
ilu-	pos	IPA	"to flare up (of lamp, fire in stove, etc.)"	nanim kengha iluuq ‘the fire in the seal oil lamp flared up’	илю-
ilughaq*	pos	IPA	father's sister's or mother's brother's child; cross-cousin; buddy	"iluuq ‘hey, cousin!’ (q.v.)"	илюӷақ
ilughasaghaq	pos	IPA	cousin	No information given.	илюӷасяӷақ
ilughwaghniighute-	pos	IPA	to tease each other (between cross-cousins)	"ilughaqullghiit ilughwaghniighunneghtughllagyalghiit maaten pipagnanightut ‘cross-cousins used to tease each other often, but now it’s rarely done’"	илюӷӱаӷнӣӷуты-
ilukegte-	pos	IPA	to be a considerate and pleasant person	No information given.	илюкыхты-
ilukliq*	pos	IPA	inner part	No information given.	илюкльиқ
ilulighaq	pos	IPA	drifting ice on the inward side of the pack ice; medium-size cake of ice in open water but with similar cakes nearby	see item 18 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	илюлиӷақ
"iluliq, ilulighneq"	pos	IPA	inside part; seam	No information given.	"илюлиқ, илюлиӷнық"
iluliqe-	pos	IPA	to have heart trouble	No information given.	илюлиқы-
ilulliqe-	pos	IPA	to be in a very bad mood; to be angry	ilulliquq ‘he is in a very bad mood’ /	илюльиқы-
ilulluk	pos	IPA	bad-tempered person	No information given.	илюльюк
ilulnguq*	pos	IPA	expensive thing; precious thing	Chukotkan	илюлңуқ
ilumigh-	pos	IPA	to snack	ilumiqaghluta angyaghhaakut ‘let’s go out boating after we snack’; ilumiitkaghqameng gaaghi sameng ‘cook something to have as a snack’	илюмиӷ-
ilumik	pos	IPA	embryo; fetus; unborn child	No information given.	илюмик
ilumike-	pos	IPA	to hold dear	"ilumikaa ‘he holds him dear, has a soft spot in his heart for him’ /"	илюмикы-
ilumilek	pos	IPA	pregnant woman or sea mammal	No information given.	илюмилык
ilumsuggangite-	pos	IPA	to feel helpless; to feel defeated	ilumsuggangituq ‘he was very concerned’; ilumsuggangunanga tengegkayugmi igleghtunga ifkaannayukanginkut ‘feeling helpless I traveled on the plane thinking that we might crash’	илюмсухаңиты-
ilungighteqe-	pos	IPA	to be anxious; to be worried	ilungightequq ‘he is worried’ / ilungightequtkaa ‘he is worried over it’	илюңиҳтықы-
ilungiitaq	pos	IPA	to snack	No information given.	илюңӣтақ
ilungiitigh-	pos	IPA	to snack	ilungiitightuq ‘he is snacking’ /	илюңӣтиӷ-
ilungite-	pos	IPA	to be indecisive; to be unreliable; to lack mental strength or willpower	No information given.	илюңиты-
ilupeghaq	pos	IPA	liner for clothes	Iigganka ilupeghalget maqapigtut. ‘My lined gloves are very warm.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 58)	илюпыӷақ
ilutmiighte-	pos	IPA	to go inward; go into the river	No information given.	илютмӣҳты-
ilutu-	pos	IPA	to be courageous	No information given.	илюту-
ilutughsagh-	pos	IPA	to encourage; to reassure; to support	ilutughsaghaa ‘he encouraged her’ /	илютуҳсяӷ-
ilutughte-	pos	IPA	to feel encouraged or reassured	ilutughtuq or ilutughtaa ‘he feels encouraged’ /	илютуҳты-
iluuq	pos	IPA	cousin (vocative); buddy (vocative)	"Iluuq, suyukaghnga! … iluuq, nayaka tugunaghan estamaneng atghaghutelek. ‘Buddy, pull me out! … buddy, I’ll give you my sister who has four cheek tatoos.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. 7-8); this is the vocative of ilughaq (q.v.)"	илю̄қ
ima	pos	IPA	too bad!; oh no!	"particle; ima aanuq ‘too bad, he went out’; cf. iimna"	има
imaangigh-	pos	IPA	to sob uncontrolably	qiyaaghwalghii imaangighnaayukan mangighhnaqutkesaaghaat ‘they were trying to make her stop crying before she starting sobbing uncontrolably’; cf. mangigh-	имāңиӷ-
imaghlliigh-	pos	IPA	to travel in rough waters	imaghlliightuq ‘he traveled in rough waters’; angyat imaghlliighngaaghmeng iwernga kaatut ‘even though the boat traveled in rough seas it arrived’; meq imaghlliighnapigtuq ‘the ocean is too rough for traveling’	имаҳлӣӷ-
imaghlluk	pos	IPA	gale; waves in ocean	No information given.	имаҳльюк
imaghniin	pos	IPA	waterproof gutskin parka used at sea	"used in the plural, imaghniitet, for one gutskin parka"	имаӷнӣн
imaghqe-	pos	IPA	to drench	imaghquq ‘it got drenched’; imaghqaa ‘he drenched it’ /	имаҳқы-
imaghtaq	pos	IPA	“shorthorn” sculpin	exact identification undetermined	имаҳтақ
imaghyak	pos	IPA	abcess; boil	No information given.	имаӷьяк
imalek	pos	IPA	filled thing; pregnant woman	No information given.	ималык
imallu	pos	IPA	not as planned	particle	ималью
imamta	pos	IPA	even though I told him/her …	"particle; Kii-i aghnaq pineghllugllapiwaa. Imamta ineghtaqsiikun! ‘Boy, that woman is sure disobedient. And here I did warn her!’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 134)"	имамта
imamtawha	pos	IPA	time after time	particle	имамтахӱа
imanaq	pos	IPA	mollusk; clam	No information given.	иманақ
imange-	pos	IPA	to leak water in; to acquire contents or pus; to become pregnant	"imanguq ‘it leaked water in’, ‘it got pus’, or ‘she got pregnant’ /"	имаңы-
imangesleq	pos	IPA	sea water pool or puddle on surface of ice field or shore	may become covered with a layer of ice and snow concealing the hazzard; see item 19 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	имаңысльық
imaq	pos	IPA	open sea; ocean; contents; pus	"imaa ‘its contents’; imami ‘in the ocean’; angyat qavaghtaamaat imami ‘the boat (with crew) spent the night out in the ocean’; Imaq unegna yakughnaqayugllak. ‘The ocean out there can be very dangerous.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 63); Kililqa imangumayalghii, aghalighluku piniightaa. ‘My cutting started getting pus, but it is okay now after putting medicine on it.’ (SLR JR. DICT. 63)"	имақ
imaqe-	pos	IPA	to be full of something	meghmeng imaquq ‘it is full of water’	имақы-
imaqlightaghaq	pos	IPA	raincoat made from long strips of walrus or bearded seal dried intestines 	Chukotka (R); usually made with embroidery	имақльиҳтаӷақ
Imaqliq*	pos	IPA	Big Diomede Island	see Map 2 in Appendices; Imaqlighmii ‘person from Big Diomede’	Имақльиқ
imaqun	pos	IPA	too bad!	particle	имақун
imatae	pos	IPA	open water (surrounded by sea ice) near land	"used in dual, imatek, for one such area; imategnun anighughluta taglaghtukut ‘we made it to the open water and came home’; imasipanghitaa ugavantaghaam ‘the northwest wind didn’t move the ice enough to make open water’"	иматаы
imatuq	pos	IPA	I don't think so	particle	иматуқ
imeg-	pos	IPA	to roll up; to coil up; to fold up; (slang) to run in a group	"imegtuq ‘it rolled itself up’ (e.g. a paper that was rolled up and had been unrolled and held flat and then rolled up again); iimgaa ‘he rolled it up’ / iimgiiq ‘he rolled up something’; iimgumaaq ‘it is rolled up’; iimgaq ‘roll of something’; iimgutaa ‘he rolled something up in it, rolled up something for her’; iimgutaghqaq ‘wrapping material’; iimgutfikuq ‘he wrapped something around himself’; iimgutfikaa ‘he wrapped something around it’"	имыг-
Imegyaalek	pos	IPA	Emekyalok Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	questioned; see Map 4 in Appendices	Имыгьялык
imerutaaghute-	pos	IPA	to coil or wind (it) around something	qiipaq imerutaaghutigu qiipalghutakun ‘wind the thread around the spool’	имырутāӷуты-
imerutaaq	pos	IPA	"coil of rope, or the like"	No information given.	имырутāқ
imeseghetaq	pos	IPA	scraper as for dishes	No information given.	имысыӷытақ
imgagh-	pos	IPA	to implant itself (of a spirit)	Chukotkan (R)	имгаӷ-
imigh-	pos	IPA	to put contents in; to fill (partially or totally)	imighaa ‘he put something in it’ / imiimaaq ‘it has had something put in it’; Aghnaq imiitiiq nunivagmeng akmagutagnun. ‘The woman put some greens in the keg.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 63)	имиӷ-
Imighi	pos	IPA	site north along coast from Emeghee Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Имиӷи
imiisaq	pos	IPA	gift given in gratitude to someone who has brought food to a feast	No information given.	имӣсяқ
imiitaa-	pos	IPA	to feel insecure when alone because of helplessness	umegneghmi imiitaamalghii iflangwaaghaluni ‘he felt insecure when he was lost in the snow storm’	имӣтā-
imiite-1	pos	IPA	to be empty	imiituq ‘it is empty’ / salngagek imiituk ‘the box is empty’	имӣты-1
imiite-2	pos	IPA	to give something to one who has brought food over	Aghnaghaghhaq aghnam imiitaa sunganeng awalighiyan neghsameng.’  ‘The woman give the little girl a beaded necklace when she brought over some seal meat.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 63)	имӣты-2
imlaa	pos	IPA	unborn seal pup	imlaalek ‘pregnant seal’	имля̄
Impagaq	pos	IPA	site at VABM “Grace” on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Импагақ
impite-	pos	IPA	to distribute or receive a piece or pieces of a catch during butchering	impituq ‘he received a piece’; impitaa ‘he gave him a pieces’ /= inpite-	импиты-
imtiwala	pos	IPA	big heavy knife carried on back by herders for self-defense	Chukotkan (R)	имтиӱаля
Imtugmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Имтугми(т)
Imtuk1	pos	IPA	former village in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Имтук1
Imtuk2	pos	IPA	pond in central area of present-day Gambell	see Map 4 in Appendices	Имтук2
imtuqaq	pos	IPA	stutter; stuttering condition	aghnaghaq imtuqalguuq ‘the girl has a stutter’; imtuqalighluni akuziiq ‘he is speaking with a stutter’	имтуқақ
imtuqiqe-	pos	IPA	to stutter	imtuqiquq ‘he stuttered’ / imtuqiqumaghmi akuziiq ‘he spokewith a stutter’	имтуқиқы-
imugh-	pos	IPA	on the verge of crying; tearful	"emotional root; imughyugtuq he is tearful, on the verge of crying; imuqaa ‘he is on the verge of crying over it over it’; imughnaghtuq ‘it makes one feel like crying’"	имуӷ-
imughaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to have watery eyes and difficulty in breathing due to wind	anuqem taghnughhaghhaq imughaghtaghqaa ‘the wind made the little child have watery eyes and difficulty in breathing’	имуӷаҳтаӷ-
imughteqe-	pos	IPA	to be tearful due to strong emotions	No information given.	имуҳтықы-
imukun	pos	IPA	it's about time!	particle; cf. iimna	имукун
imutagh-	pos	IPA	to coil the rope of (it)	angalqatani imutaghaqeftii unangkani tuguluku ‘he was coiling the rope of his seal hook after taking his seal’	имутаӷ-
inagmig-	pos	IPA	to hold in lap	No information given.	инагмиг-
inak	pos	IPA	lap (of body)	used in the dual for one lap: inagegka ‘my lap’	инак
ineg-	pos	IPA	to have pain in inguinal glands	iin’gaqaa ‘he has pain in his inguinal glands’; see also inek	иныг-
ineghla	pos	IPA	friend; favorite companion	No information given.	иныӷля
ineghneghlliqe-	pos	IPA	to be disobedient; to play about	No information given.	иныӷныҳльиқы-
ineghte-	pos	IPA	to admonish; to warn; to alert; to forbid; to tell not to do something	ineghtaa ‘he forbade her’ / iinghutaa ‘he warned about it’; ineghneghlluk ‘one who is hard to discipline’	иныҳты-
inegmig-	pos	IPA	to put under one's arm or between one's leg; to put in pocket	No information given.	иныгмиг-
inegniigh-	pos	IPA	to put hand into pocket	Chukotkan (R)	иныгнӣӷ-
inegrewaaq	pos	IPA	middle of armpit or groin	No information given.	иныгрыӱāқ
inek	pos	IPA	groin; armpit; bend in body or land similar to armpit or groin	iin’ga ‘his groin’ or ‘its (the montain’s) base area’	инык
inekiitek	pos	IPA	"well maybe, as a matter of fact; if I do something; if perchance"	particle; = enekiitek	иныкӣтык
ineligh-	pos	IPA	to sew on a pocket	Chukotkan (R)	инылиӷакā
ineqe-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > ineqsuke-, ineqsunagh-, iinqe-"	инықы-
ineqerewaaq	pos	IPA	armpit (specifically)	No information given.	инықырыӱāқ
ineqsuke-	pos	IPA	to find attractive or cute (especially a baby)	"ineqsukaa ‘he finds him cute, attractive’ /"	инықсюкы-
ineqsunagh-	pos	IPA	to be attractive (especially of a female); to be pretty	"ineqsunaghtuq ‘she is attractive, pretty’ /"	инықсюнаӷ-
ineqsunaghhalek	pos	IPA	how cute!; how pretty!; how attractive!’; how beautiful!	particle	инықсюнаҳалык
ingagh-	pos	IPA	lying down	postural root; ingaghtuq ‘he lay down’; ingaghtaa ‘he lay it down’; ingaghngaaq ‘he is lying down’; ingaghmi ‘lieing down’	иңаӷ-
Ingaghpak	pos	IPA	site on the mainland side of Chechekuyem Strait in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Иңаҳпак
Ingaliq1	pos	IPA	Little Diomede Island	see Map 6 in Appendices; Ingalighmii ‘person from Little Diomede’	Иңалиқ1
Ingaliq2	pos	IPA	southwesternmost of the Punuk Islands off the east coast of St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Иңалиқ2
"ingan, ingata"	pos	IPA	"side area of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	"иңан, иңата"
ingani	pos	IPA	over there	look under iigna	иңани
ingapighqaagh-	pos	IPA	to move over a little; to postpone	"ingapighqaaghtuq ‘he moved over’; ingapighqaaghaa ‘he moved it, postponed it’ /cf. ingani"	иңапиҳқāӷ-
ingatngiiritaq	pos	IPA	wall plank of or support for side area of traditional dwelling	No information given.	иңатңӣритақ
ingek	pos	IPA	ink	iingka ‘my ink’	иңык
inghu-	pos	IPA	"to pick berries; to pick up small berry-like items (beads, marbles, etc.)"	inghuuq ‘he picked berries’; inghwii ‘he picked them’ / inghutaa ‘he picked berries for her’; inghuvik ‘berry-picking spot on the tundra’	инӷу-
inglaghet	pos	IPA	a certain ceremonial competion	"Chukotkan (R); two groups face each other, one on the north side and the other on the south side of the dwelling; the competition begins with singing and dancing; the winning team recieves an award"	иңляӷыт
ingleghan	pos	IPA	breeding ground on ice for sea mammals	Chukotkan (R)	иңлыӷан
ingleghaq	pos	IPA	sled bed slat	No information given.	иңлыӷақ
ingleghem imaa	pos	IPA	family 	Chukotkan (R); literally ‘the contents of the living/sleeping area’	иңлыӷым имā
Ingleghnaghmii(t) 	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Иңлыӷнаӷмӣ(т)
Ingleghnaq	pos	IPA	former village east of Cape Sivolkut in Chukotka 	see Map 3 in Appendices	Иңлыӷнақ
Ingleghrengestat	pos	IPA	site near Powooliak	see Map 4 in Applendices	Ӣңлыӷрыңыстат
ingleghtaq	pos	IPA	"crosspiece fastening together foundation poles (emgaari) around the periphery of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	иңлыҳтақ
inglek	pos	IPA	anchor for a snare	Chukotkan (R)	иңлык
ingleq	pos	IPA	"living/sleeping area in the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.), or in a tent or shack"	"also used in the plural, ingleghet, for one such area"	иңлық
ingliigh-	pos	IPA	to lay out bedding	"yugem sleeping bag-ni tuguluku ingliighluni ingaghlluni qavaamalghii ‘the man took his sleeping bag, laid (it) out for bedding, went to bed and slept’"	иңлӣӷ-
ingllegun	pos	IPA	household member; roommae	ingllegutkullghiini qerngaghmetukut ‘we are together with our household members’; ingllegutanga igaghyaghaquq ‘her roommate goes to school’	иңльыгун
ingllevagh-	pos	IPA	to move sideways	siqinghem piitellgha ingllevaghtuq ‘where the sun rises moved further to the side’	иңльываӷ-
ingllevaq	pos	IPA	area farther to the side	ingllevaq aagna aqavzigtuuq ‘the area farther to that side has lots of salmonberries’	иңльывақ
inglu	pos	IPA	partner; one of pair; spouse; complementary side; half	iiyma inglunga ‘my other eye’; inglungituq ‘he doesn't have a partner’; inglukaa ‘he is her partner’	иңлю
inglugtun	pos	IPA	with both sides; with both arms	particle	иңлюхтун
inglukutaq	pos	IPA	wooden hook used to retrieve a fishing line from the water in order to clean off the ice from it	No information given.	иңлюкутақ
inglupigaq	pos	IPA	one side only	No information given.	иңлюпигақ
ingluziq	pos	IPA	exchange wife	Chukotkan (R)	иңлюзиқ
ingtaghan	pos	IPA	brace or spreader used between keel and gunwale in building skin boat frame	No information given.	иңтаӷан
ingum	pos	IPA	of the one over there; that over there (relative case)	look under iigna	иңум
"ingun, inguta"	pos	IPA	boat seat; thwart	No information given.	"иңун, иңута"
inguqaq	pos	IPA	captain's seat	cf. ingun	иңуқақ
ingutuq	pos	IPA	yearling bowhead whale (Balaena mysticetus)	No information given.	иңутуқ
"ingyagh-, ingyaghaghte-"	pos	IPA	to do something ahead of another; to pass; to go ahead of; to surpass	inghyaghaa or ingyaghaghtaa ‘he got ahead of him’ / kilgaaqulghiini mekelghiighem sivulini ingyaghaa ‘in the foot-race the boy gained and and passed the one who was in front of him’; uyughaan anengani ingyaghaa ‘the younger brother caught up with and surpassed his older brother in height’; aghnam angyameng kakillghiini ilani ingyaghaghtii ‘the woman finished sewing her part before the others when they sewed the skin-boat covering’	"иңьяӷ-, иңьяӷаҳты-"
ini-	pos	IPA	to hang to dry	inii ‘he hung it or them up’ / iniiguq ‘he hung something’; iniighet ‘clothes that have been hung to dry’	ини-
iniiragh-	pos	IPA	to dry meat in strips to dry inside the house	iniiraghtuq ‘he hung strips of meat to dry’; iniiraghaa ‘he hung it up to dry’ /	инӣраӷ-
iniiraq	pos	IPA	small strip of dried meat	No information given.	инӣрақ
inilleq	pos	IPA	frame for drying skins	Chukotkan (V&E)	инильық
inillghaataq	pos	IPA	clothesline	No information given.	инильҳāтақ
inpite-	pos	IPA	to distribute or receive a piece or pieces of a catch during butchering	inpituq ‘he received a piece’; inpitaa ‘he gave him a piece’ / = impite-	инпиты-
inqun	pos	IPA	just because; in order to; of course	particle	инқун
insenae	pos	IPA	engine; motor	"also used in Chukotka; used in the dual, insenek, for one engine or motor"	инсынаы
inseniya	pos	IPA	engineer	also used in Chukotka	инсыния
inukagh-	pos	IPA	to suddenly change one’s mind and withdraw from an activity or not repeat an action	"inukaghluni allallu piyaghqaagpenani pikaaguq ‘he suddenly changed his mind and will never to do it again’; ilakutekestaghngaaghmek inukaasimaak ‘they2 were  friends, but suddenly they changed their minds (about each other)’ "	инукаӷ-
Invet	pos	IPA	Invut Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Инвыт
"inwa, inwallu"	pos	IPA	not even; without even	"particle; Whangkuta katam quyngilegni, iwerngaqun nasiqutestaqiinkut piyukellemtestun inwa tukfighluku. ‘Those of us who owned reindeer could get as much as we wanted not even having to pay for of it.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:84)"	"инӱа, инӱалью"
inwaamllu	pos	IPA	not even; without even	No information given.	инӱāмлью
ipa	pos	IPA	the truth; in truth; in fact	"ipanguuq ‘it is true’; also a particle: Pilugugluni aatkallegaghhani taakut aghyughllakat iqisaqminiki pinilghiimeng aalluni, nuyani pinighsaghwaaghyaqminigu, aghnaaftughnguq ipa. 'After he got dressed, when he took off his old worn out clothes and put on good clothing, when he fixed his hair, well, ""he"" evidentally was a female in fact!' (AYUM. UNGIP. II:7)"	ипа
ipallu	pos	IPA	unexpectedly; out of the ordinary	particle; ipallu qaspighqelluku taghnughhani aqlaghangilngughmi aanutaa ‘she dressed her baby more than would be expected on the warm day and took her outside’	ипалью
ipapestaaq	pos	IPA	of course; certainly; truthfully	particle	ипапыстāқ
ipapiighqe-	pos	IPA	to come to pass; to become reality	Entaqun ataasiighneghunaqeghllaget ipapiighqengnganaqeghllaget samun tamaghhaanun. ‘Probably they endeavored to be direct and forthright in regard to everything.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:86)	ипапӣҳқы-
ipapik	pos	IPA	correctness; truth; reality; indeed; really; truthfully	"ipapigestun ‘like reality’; ipapiglluggaghestun ‘as if it were real’; also functions as aparticle: ""Ukamangaatnguzin?"" ""Ipapik.""  ‘“Are you Ukamangaan?” “Indeed (I am).” (UNGIPAGHAGH. 5); Angyalegtam aapsimakanga, ""Ipapiik?"" Kaanghum pimakanga, ""Ipapik."" ‘The captain asked him, “Really?” Kaanghu answered, “Really.” (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 42); Iwernga elpek alingumangilnguten, ipapik  iknaquten. “However you weren’t scared, for indeed you are strong.” (AANGHHAQ 38)"	ипапик
ipeg-	pos	IPA	to be sharp	ipegtuq ‘it is sharp’ / ipegrakegtaq ‘a very sharp or very pointed thing’	ипыг-
ipegriqe-	pos	IPA	to be persistent	ipegriquq ‘he is being persistent’ /	ипыгриқы-
ipegsaan	pos	IPA	whetstone; sharpening stone	No information given.	ипыхся̄н
ipegsagh-	pos	IPA	to sharpen; whet	No information given.	ипыхсяӷ-
ipig-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > ipigkestaaghhaq, ipigkingwaaq, ipigra-, ipigtu-"	ипиг-
ipigkestaaghhaq	pos	IPA	one that does not come far up the leg; low boot	No information given.	ипихкыстāҳақ
ipigkingwaaq	pos	IPA	short boot of shaved sealskin	No information given.	ипигкиңӱāқ
ipigra-	pos	IPA	to be kicking about; to be thrashing around with the feet	ipigramaluku meghmi kaalluku tugwaat ‘he was thrashing around in the water when they rescued him’;  taghnughhaq ipigrangakun uyamigluku aanutaa ‘he took the child out on his shoulders when he was thrashing and kicking around’	ипигра-
ipigtu-	pos	IPA	"to come high up the leg (of boots, socks, etc.)"	No information given.	ипихту-
iptag-	pos	IPA	to pry; to use a lever on	iptagaa ‘he pried it up’ / iptagiiq ‘he pried up something’; cf. ipug-	иптаг-
iptagusiq	pos	IPA	lever	No information given.	иптагусиқ
ipug-	pos	IPA	to pry; to scoop; to pick up with a fork or other sharp object	"ipugaa ‘he scooped it, pried it up, lifted it up with a fork’ / ipugutuq ‘he scooped up some’; cf. iptag-"	ипуг-
ipugte-	pos	IPA	to tilt up one's head; to perk up	"ipugtuq ‘he lifted his head, he perked up’ / ipugtestaa ‘he lifted her spirits’"	ипухты-
ipugutaq	pos	IPA	fork (for eating or cooking)	"may be used in the plural, ipugutat, for one fork"	ипугутақ
iqa	pos	IPA	dirt	"iqatuqaq ‘dirty thing’; iqalguuq ‘it has dirt on it’; iqatuuq ‘it is full of, or covered with, dirt’"	иқа
iqaaghqe-	pos	IPA	to get dirty	iqaaghquq ‘he got dirty’; iqaaghqaa ‘he got it dirty’ /	иқāҳқы-
iqaaslaak	pos	IPA	lamprey (Lampetra japonica)	No information given.	иқāслья̄к
iqae	pos	IPA	lower cheek; corner of mouth	cf. iiqmik	иқаы
iqaghtaq	pos	IPA	skin and layer under skin	Chukotkan; qengagka maaqem qenwat asikek iqaghtiighumaak ‘the area under my nose loses its skin from being wiped so often’	иқаҳтақ
iqali-	pos	IPA	to get acquainted with a stranger 	anguughem tagtalngani qenwat  iqalimalghii ‘while stormbound he got acquainted with a stranger’; iqalituk ‘they got acquainted with each other’	иқали-
iqalliniigh-	pos	IPA	to fish	No information given.	иқальинӣӷ-
iqalliniighvik	pos	IPA	fishing camp	No information given.	иқальинӣӷвик
iqallugaq	pos	IPA	tomcod (Microgadus proximus)	No information given.	иқальюгақ
iqalluk	pos	IPA	fish; salmon	No information given.	иқальюк
iqallupik	pos	IPA	dolly varden (Salvelinus malma)	No information given.	иқальюпик
Iqalugsik	pos	IPA	Ikalooksik River on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Иқалюхсик
iqanengenaaq	pos	IPA	arctic staghorn sculpin (Gymnocanthus tricuspis)	"cf. iqalluk, iqaniigh-"	иқаныңынāқ
iqangigh-	pos	IPA	to clean	iqangightuq ‘he cleaned himself or cleaned something’; iqangighaa ‘he cleaned it’ /	иқаңиӷ-
iqangite-	pos	IPA	to be clean	iqangituq ‘it is clean’ / iqangunaan ‘leaving it clean’	иқаңиты-
iqangwaaq	pos	IPA	slob; slovenly person; dirty person	Chukotkan (R)	иқаңӱāқ
iqaniigh-	pos	IPA	to fish for king crab through the ice	"iqaniightuq ‘he fished for king crab’; cf. iqalluk, iqanengenaaq; Iqaniighyaghtunga ataka maliglluku, ataasineng neghnaghtunga. ‘I went crabbing with my father and got one crab.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 117)"	иқанӣӷ-
iqarwa	pos	IPA	much dirt; dirty person (children’s term)	No information given.	иқарӱа
iqatu-	pos	IPA	to be dirty	iqatuuq ‘it is dirty’	иқату-
iqe-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > iqelmun, iqeskestaaq, iqetu-, iqetughte-"	иқы-
iqeghta	pos	IPA	hard wood (perhaps birch) used for seal hooks	No information given.	иқыҳта
iqeghtaq	pos	IPA	color; coloration	iqeghtalguuq ‘it has color’; Atkuyaaghma iqeghtakek ghevuk. ‘The color of my shirt is fading away.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 53); Nallavraghyaghqaqenghitiit tawatengwaaq iqeghtaq ayuqsaghngaan. ‘They (the fawns’ mothers) could tell them apart even if their coloration was the same.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:58)	иқыҳтақ
iqeghte-	pos	IPA	to tether a dead walrus to shore or boat for butchering	iqeghtuq ‘he tethered a dead walrus’; iqeghtaa ‘he tethered it’ /	иқыҳты-
iqeghtiigh-	pos	IPA	to remove or lose paint; to scrape one’s skin accidently	angyam piingha iqeghtiighumaaq ‘the paint on the boat is wearing out’; ikuyeni iqeghtiighaa iquluni ‘he scraped his skin when he fell’	иқыҳтӣӷ-
iqeghutaq	pos	IPA	rope used to tether a dead walrus	Chukotkan (R)	иқыӷутақ
iqekestaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	narrow thing	iqekestaaghhaaguq ‘it is narrow’	иқыкыстāҳақ
iqekestaaq	pos	IPA	narrow thing	iqekestaaghuuq ‘it is narrow’	иқыкыстāқ
iqelmun	pos	IPA	widthwise; across the width	No information given.	иқылмун
iqelquq	pos	IPA	little finger	iqelqghwa ‘his little finger’	иқыльқуқ
iqemyaaghagh-	pos	IPA	to grin broadly	Umiilek aga aanlaataghtuq iqemyaaghaamaghmi. ‘The King went out again with a big grin on his face.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:232)	иқымья̄ҳаӷ-
iqenge-	pos	IPA	to smile	iqenguq ‘he is smiling’ / iqengutaa ‘he is smiling at her’	иқыңы-
iqetu-	pos	IPA	to be wide	iqetuuq ‘it is wide’ / iqetuqaq ‘wide thing’	иқыту-
iqetughte-	pos	IPA	to widen	iqetughtuq ‘it became wide’; iqetughtaa ‘he widened it’ /	иқытуҳты-
iqetutalae	pos	IPA	width	iqetutalnga or iqetutalanga ‘its width’	иқытуталаы
iqezegaq	pos	IPA	skin and blubber from corner of whale's mouth	No information given.	иқызыгақ
iqezeghaq	pos	IPA	skin and fat (mangtak) from corner of whale’s mouth	No information given.	иқызыӷақ
iqiqute-	pos	IPA	to move (it/him) over or away; remove (it/him)	"iqiqutaa ‘he moved over to make room for her’; akuzitkegutmineng iqiqutaa ‘since he is a convincing speaker he got him to move away from the situation’; Drum-a tamaana iqiqughtaakaat sukalluku, iqitkaqegkangat guunnayukan. ‘They quickly removed all the oil drums before they could explode’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:66)"	иқиқуты-
iqite-	pos	IPA	to move; to remove	iqituq ‘he moved’; iqitaa ‘he removed it’ /	иқиты-
iqitqute-	pos	IPA	to move away from a crowd	uglaghyugluni ilamineng waran ellnga iqitqutuq ‘he left because he felt that there were too much of a crowd’	иқитқуты-
iqitute-	pos	IPA	to make room for	"iqitutuk ‘they2 separated, made room for eachother’; iqitutaa ‘he made room for him’"	иқитуты-
iqlengagh-	pos	IPA	to be a liar	iqlengaghtuq ‘he is a liar’; iqlungalghii ‘liar’ / Aqlaghaghwuggaaq uksaaqestami iqlengaawaquq. ‘When it begins to feel cold in early fall the cold weather is not here for real.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 67); cf. iqlumghu-	иқльыңаӷ-
iqlengasak	pos	IPA	liar	No information given.	иқльыңасяк
iqlengiqe-	pos	IPA	to lie; to tell lie(s)	"iqlengiquq ‘he lied, he was telling lies’ / iqlengiqutaa ‘he lied for her’; iqlengiqutkaa ‘he lied about her’"	иқльыңиқы-
iqligh-	pos	IPA	to light a seal-oil lamp	Chukotkan (R)	иқльиӷ-
iqlighayiilliqe-	pos	IPA	to smile awkwardly from embarrassment	iqlighayiilliquq ‘he smiled in an awkward way’; cf. iqlighte-	иқльиӷаӥӣльиқы-
iqlighmete-	pos	IPA	to be smiling	"iqlighmetuq ‘he is smiling’ / Taawa naqam iqlighmetngwaaghtuk, iiggeput aghulataataghiik angyam imiini. ‘But the whole time they2 were smiling, shaking hands with everyone in the boat.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:204)"	иқльиӷмыты-
iqlighte-	pos	IPA	to smile	cf. iqlighayiilliqe-	иқльиҳты-
iqlugte-	pos	IPA	to gnaw	iqlugtuq ‘he gnawed something’; iqlugtaa ‘he gnawed it’ /	иқльюхты-
"iqlumghu-,"	pos	IPA	to doubt; to be unsure of something	iqlumghuuq ‘he is unsure’ / ungipaq iqlumghunaghtuq ‘the news is questionable’; iqlumghuyukaak ullghitagni ‘he had doubts about his snowmachine’	иқльюмӷу-
iqmiligha-	pos	IPA	to have so much food in the mouth that the cheeks bulge	neqni taam iqmilighatkaa ‘he stuffed his food so much that his cheeks  bulged’; neragkiighem repall iqmilighaluni ‘he was eating so fast that his checks bulged’; cf. iiqmig-	иқмилиӷа-
iqmiqaq	pos	IPA	ornament-like appendage hanging from the side of the mouth of an auklet	kayumun nuluusit iqsaget iiqngikun sukilpaam iqmiqaaneng iqmiqighaqiit ‘the appendages from the sides of the mouth of the auklet are used on the sides of a fishing lure as appendages’; kavilngughmeng iqsani iqmiqighluku nulughtuq ‘he fished using red appendages on the sides of his fishing lure’; cf. iiqmig-	иқмиқақ
iqrag-	pos	IPA	uneven; distorted	postural root; iqragtuq it got uneven; iqragtaa he made it uneven; iqragngaaq ‘it is uneven’	иқшаг-
iqraghqe-	pos	IPA	to become crooked; to distort one’s face	No information given.	иқҳқы-
iqragmete-	pos	IPA	to be crooked; to be slanted	"iqragmetuq ‘it is crooked or slanted’ / Iqragmetaghngaata kakinaqutkegkaagunga, nalikek eight, nine-years-ngulunga. ‘Even though they (the stitches) were crooked I tried to sew all the time when I was eight or nine.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)"	иқшагмыты-
iqregaghte-	pos	IPA	to chip	iqregaghtuq ‘it chipped’; iqregaghtaa ‘he chipped it’ /	иқшыгаҳты-
iqrek	pos	IPA	tip of pointed object; point; little bit	No information given.	иқшык
iqsak	pos	IPA	fish hook	No information given.	иқсяк
iqu-	pos	IPA	to fall over	"iquuq ‘he or it fell over ‘/ iqutaa ‘he knocked it over’; iquvzightuq ‘it almost fell, he stumbled’; ullghitam igleghaviga vega iqustengngwaaghluni ‘the grass on the all-terrain vehicle trail was quite flattened’"	иқу-
iqugte-	pos	IPA	to end; to come to an end	iqugtekan ‘when it comes to an end’	иқухты-
iquk	pos	IPA	end; tip	iquga ‘its end’	иқук
iquklighpigaq	pos	IPA	the very end	No information given.	иқуқльиҳпигақ
iqukliq	pos	IPA	the one at the end	No information given.	иқукльиқ
iqukngitaq	pos	IPA	clothes placed next to one lying down for warmth or to block a draft	Chukotkan (R)	иқукңьитақ
iqukngwaaq	pos	IPA	end or edge piece trimmed off of something	iqukngwaaghet neqet qikmimun neghqutkennakesi ‘feed the cut of end or edge pieces of meat to the dogs’	иқукңӱāқ
iqukruk	pos	IPA	the very end	No information given.	иқукшук
iqunighte-	pos	IPA	to slant; to lean; to tilt; to favor (agree or side with someone)	No information given.	иқуниҳты-
iqusleq	pos	IPA	bent grass stuck to the ground; matted grass	nunivagmi iqusleq kaasaqmegteggu quyngim tumanga ‘they came across bent grass in the tundra and found out it was the tracks of reindeer’	иқусльық
iqute-	pos	IPA	to defeat in a wrestling match	No information given.	иқуты-
iquyaq1	pos	IPA	piece of ivory between harpoon point and shaft	this piece is fastened to the shaft	иқуяқ1
iquyaq2	pos	IPA	type of clam	exact identification undetermined	иқуяқ2
iqwaagha-	pos	IPA	to stumble or stagger around	iqwaaghaaq ‘he staggered or stumbled around’ /	иқӱāӷа-
iriig-	pos	IPA	to not fall; to stay erect	"aghvightami miluqiit ullenghinneghata iriigniiqiit ‘when they play a certain game, the thrown objects that don’t fall are said to still be erect’; milusaghluku iriigtuq ‘when he threw it, it didn’t fall’"	ирӣг-
isami-	pos	IPA	to pay attention to (him); to tend to (him)	"isamii ‘she payed attention to him, tended to him’ / kukriqnayukan isamiighnaken ‘in case he has difficulty, pay attention to him’; uyuqlightaasi isamiighaqluki ‘pay attention to those that are younger than you’"	исами-
isavghagh-	pos	IPA	to move boat on sea ice using small sled	isavghaghtut ‘they are moving a boat’; isavghaghaat ‘they are moving it’ / = esavghagh-	исявӷаӷ-
isavghaq	pos	IPA	person moving a boat on sea ice using a small sled	#NAME?	исявӷақ
iseki	pos	IPA	how cold!	exclamatory particle; said when coming into contact with cold liquid or solid	исыки
isekinagh-	pos	IPA	"to be cold to the touch (of water, metal, etc.)"	isekinaghtuq ‘it feels cold’ / isekinaghtaa ‘it got cold’	исыкинаӷ-
"isi, isigima"	pos	IPA	I thought (mistakenly) that; it seemed that	"particle; … isi keviiwaqelghii quyngim keviqaqegkanga isigima. Liitngwaaghlunga piyalghiinga aghveghwaaqeftuq aghvengllaqaghhaq. ‘… I thought it was a sausage, stuffed with reindeer, so it seemed. After I learned what was what I realized that it was a figurine or a whale, an image of a whale. (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:144); Taagken neghulluta, apeghiighluta, elngaataall, isigimaqun laluramkestun ayuqumalghiit nangaghneghit ... neghnaqillghit, sangighquqayuget. Tipelelget, salget. ‘Then we ate, afterwards, it sure seemed to me, that their customs where like that of the white people … the way they eat, how they washed the dishes. They had tables and other such things.' (PANGEGH. 3)"	"иси, исигима"
isiqaghte-	pos	IPA	to splash	isiqaghtuq ‘he splashed himself’; isiqaghtaa ‘he splashed her’ / = esiqaghte-	исиқаҳты-
isiqghute-	pos	IPA	to toss out liquid; to throw out liquid	cf. isiqaghte-	исиқҳуты-
isiqghuute-	pos	IPA	to fall into the water with a splash	cf. isiqaghte-	исиқҳӯты-
itag-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > itagnagh-, itagsi-, itagtaq, itake-"	итаг-
itagnagh-	pos	IPA	to be okay; to be satisfactory; to be acceptable	"itagnaghsiin? ‘are you okay?’; Taaqluni nanevgaam iitghesqumayaqanga ingleghmun. Mekelghiighem pimakanga, ""Itagnaghtunga whani qavaghllequnga.""  ‘Finally the old man told him to come in to the sleeping area. The boy answered him, “I’m okay (where I am), I’ll sleep here.”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 68)"	итагнаӷ-
itagnaghhalek	pos	IPA	so fine!; so satisfactory!	exclamatory particle	итагнаҳалык
itagnaghi-	pos	IPA	to recover; to get well; to get enough to feel satisfied; to become acceptable	No information given.	итагнаӷи-
itagnaghyug-	pos	IPA	to feel satisfied	No information given.	итагнаӷьюг-
itagnatun	pos	IPA	in a satisfactory way; satisfactorily; appropriately; acceptably	particle	итагнатун
itagsi-	pos	IPA	to be thrifty; to not be wasteful	"itagsiiq ‘he is thrifty, not wasteful’ / itagsineq ‘thrifty person’"	итахси-
itagtaq	pos	IPA	something saved (as for later use or for a special occasion)	itagtat iqalluget gaaghii aghnam eltughani birthday-yan ‘the woman cooked the salmon that she had saved up when her grandchild had a birthday’	итахтақ
itake-	pos	IPA	"to take care of (self, clothes, belongings, etc.); to save for later use; to conserve"	"itakuq ‘he was careful with himself, took care of himself; itakaa ‘he took care of it, saved it’ /"	итакы-
"itararat, itararay"	pos	IPA	danger!	particle; signals real or imagined danger (?)	"итарарат, итарараӥ"
itegaastagh-	pos	IPA	"to hit on the foot with rock, bullet, arrow, etc."	No information given.	итыгāстаӷ-
itegaastaghmig-	pos	IPA	to catch with claws or talons	No information given.	итыгāстаӷмиг-
itegaq	pos	IPA	foot	may be used in the plural for a person's two feet: iteganka ‘my feet’; Aghvemta suqaa qula itegaghtutkaftuq. ‘The baleen on our whale was ten feet long.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 155)	итыгақ
itegayaaq	pos	IPA	slipper	No information given.	итыгася̄қ
itegh-	pos	IPA	to go in; to enter; to move in	iteghtuq ‘he entered’; iitghaa ‘he entered it’ or ‘he moved into it’ /	итыӷ-
iteghaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to submerge (of whales)	No information given.	итыӷаӷӱаӷӱāӷ-
itegherki-	pos	IPA	to move back and forth or in and out; to go by boat betweem ice floes	qunganganun itegherkiluteng nunavangumalghiit ‘they went in and out of open water among the ice floes  and they got to a herd of walrus’; itegherkiluteng mellasimakangi ‘they went in and out (of the ice) and they got stuck in there’	итыӷырки-
itegherqi	pos	IPA	lunch; dinner	Chukotkan (R)	итыӷышқи
iteghsigh-	pos	IPA	to move into a house	No information given.	итыҳсиӷ-
iteghvik	pos	IPA	entrance; opening for something to go in	No information given.	итыӷвик
iteghwaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to submerge (of whales)	No information given.	итыӷӱаӷӱāӷ-
itegmig-	pos	IPA	to kick	itegmigaa ‘he kicked it’ /	итыгмиг-
itegmignaq	pos	IPA	ball game; soccer	Chukotkan (R)	итыгмигнақ
itegmigute-	pos	IPA	to trip and fall; to kick against something	No information given.	итыгмигуты-
itegmilqutaghaq	pos	IPA	newly-fallen snow	Chukotkan (R); questioned	итыгмильқутаӷақ
itegsineq	pos	IPA	skin and blubber at crease of whale tail; whale fluke used as pretend whale (by children?)	No information given.	итыхсинық
itek	pos	IPA	toecap of skin-boot	No information given.	итык
iteme-	pos	IPA	to come undone; to come untied	itemuq ‘it came undone’ / itemtaa ‘he undid it’; = ileme-	итымы-
itemqugh-	pos	IPA	to take apart; to disassemble	itemqughaa ‘he took it apart’	итымқуӷ-
itemquusiq	pos	IPA	screwdriver	No information given.	итымқӯсиқ
itenwaati	pos	IPA	person living with a family not his/her own; lodger; tenant	Chukotkan	итынӱāти
itghagh-	pos	IPA	to go further inward	No information given.	итҳаӷ-
itghaghwaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to submerge (of whales)	No information given.	итҳаӷӱаӷӱāӷ-
itghute-	pos	IPA	to bring in	itghutaa ‘he brought it in’ / cf. iitghute-	итҳуты-
itghuugute-	pos	IPA	to get wet; to be soaked	amiiraq meghmi itghuugusimaa ‘the seal skin got soaked in the water’	итҳугуты-
itineq	pos	IPA	ice protuding out beneath the water’s surface from the bottom of a floe or ice field	see item 20 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	итинық
itugigh-	pos	IPA	to milk	aghnaghaam itugighaqaa kaakw ‘the girl is milking the cow’; itugighta ‘milkmaid’	итугиӷ-
ituk	pos	IPA	"milk (of cow, dog, seal, walrus, but not human)"	No information given.	итук
itupill	pos	IPA	perhaps it's better that; preferably	particle; Entaqun kiyaghneghem meghmi tuqusnegha ighlekaanga. Itupill quutmi tuqusqesimakanganga. ‘Maybe God doesn’t want me to die in the water. He wants me preferably to die on land.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 10)	итупиль
itupilqun	pos	IPA	perhaps; preferably	particle	итупильқун
ivagh-	pos	IPA	to search for; to miss (and look for); to look for	"ivaghtuq ‘he (child usually) misses someone (parents usually)’; ivaghaa ‘he is searching for it or her, misses (and looks for) her’ / ivaghiiq ‘he is searching for something or someone’"	иваӷ-
ivaghniigh-	pos	IPA	to hunt	"Sazinga? Tagneghtestaghpenga, uyavaneng, esghaghaqnaghaatnga ukazit, afsengaat. Natenngam ivaghiniighnaqsinga? Nalluniighutestaghpenga! ‘What have you done to me? You’ve made me black; from the distance the hares and mice can see me. How can I hunt? You’ve made me very visible!’ (AANGHHAQ 28)"	иваӷнӣӷ-
ivaghniighta	pos	IPA	hunter	No information given.	иваӷнӣҳта
ivaghulluk	pos	IPA	prayer song sung by or for boat captain at whaling time	No information given.	иваӷульюк
ivaghutaq	pos	IPA	prayer song sung by or for boat captain at whaling time	No information given.	иваӷутақ
ivalu	pos	IPA	sinew	No information given.	ивалю
ivalungqughruk	pos	IPA	tendon	No information given.	ивалюңқуӷрук
ivegh-	pos	IPA	to wade	iveghtuq ‘he waded’; iivghaa ‘he waded it’ /	ивыӷ-
ivenrugh-	pos	IPA	to operate an outboard motor; to go by a boat powered by a motor	ivenrughtuq ‘he is operating the motor ‘/ this verb is a back formation from the noun ivenruuta (q.v.); Taan’gavek ivenrughtukut elngaatall malghugneghuluta. ‘We were in two boats when we left using our motors.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:116); also used in Chukotka as a verb	ивынруӷ-
ivenrughta	pos	IPA	person who operates outboard motor	No information given.	ивынруҳта
"ivenruuta, ivenruun"	pos	IPA	outboard motor	"also used in Chukotka; may be used in the dual, ivenruutek, for one motor; ivenruutegka seghleghuuk ‘my motor is bad’; though from an American brand-name this word has been intruduced in Chukotka since Soviet times; the form ivenruun is a back formation from the dual or plural"	"ивынрӯта, ивынрӯн"
ivgagh-	pos	IPA	to come or go around the corner; to come or go into the room	ivgaghtuq ‘he came or went around the corner’; ivgaghaa ‘he came or went around it (corner or the like)’/	ивгаӷ-
ivgagha-	pos	IPA	to be in a trance (usually alone)	ivgaghaaq ‘he is in a trance’ /	ивгаӷа-
ivgaghneq	pos	IPA	wind blowing around a cliff or from the side; ocean ice that goes around Northwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.; east and aorth wind	No information given.	ивгаӷнық
ivgaghutkaq	pos	IPA	ice that flows from the south in spring when sea is mostly ice-free	"may be used in dual, ivgaghutkak; ivgaghutkagnguq nunavagllaguuk ‘the ice that came (to Gambell from the south) is said have a lot of walrus’; see item 21 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	ивгаӷуткақ
Ivgaq	pos	IPA	Eevwak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Ивгақ
ivgeghreghugh-	pos	IPA	for a strong wind to come around a point or projection of land	cf. ivgagh-	ивгыӷрыӷуӷ-
ivghaagh-	pos	IPA	to wade around	ivghaaghtuq ‘he waded around’ /	ивӷāӷ-
ivgheghruk	pos	IPA	wind at cliff coming from various directions	Chukotkan (R)	имӷыӷрук
ivi	pos	IPA	one of a group of clan women sitting in front of the captain’s house and singing whaling songs	Ivinguut aghnat aqumuulluteng. Aqumutiighluki aquutam taam kelukaghaakun. ‘The women were ceremonial singers and would sit toghether. They’d sit right behind the steering oar.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:218); cf. iviiq	иви
Ivighnaq	pos	IPA	Evghinak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ивиӷнақ
iviigh-	pos	IPA	to celebrate a certain ceremony in which a group of clan women sing after a whale has been caught 	No information given.	ивӣӷ-
iviighun	pos	IPA	ceremonial song sung after a whale has been caught	No information given.	ивӣӷун
iviiq	pos	IPA	a certain ceremony after a whale has been caught in which a group of clan women sing	cf. ivi	ивӣқ
ivilengestaq	pos	IPA	razor clam shell	No information given.	ивилыңыстақ
ivilu	pos	IPA	clamshell; clam	No information given.	ивилю
ivisa	pos	IPA	flounder; halibut	No information given.	ивися
ivrestuunae	pos	IPA	grindstone; sharpener	"Chukotkan (R, V&E); used in the dual, ivrestuunek, for one such device"	иврыстӯнаы
ivrestuune-	pos	IPA	to sharpen with a whetstone	Chukotkan	иврыстӯны-
iwernga	pos	IPA	but then; only; yet; anyway; however	"particle; eslallugughtesugnisaghaa iwernga siqinghuughtaa ‘it looked like it was going to rain but then the sun began to shine’; Ungipaghaninguq imani nenglumelnguq taana aghnaghaghhaq ellnginaghhaalghii, iwernga aghnaghaghpaggaaghtekaq, anglighpakaghhaq. ‘Among the stories of long ago, there was a girl alone in an underground house, but fortunately she was a grown-up girl.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:29); Nenglum ulimallghanun nuughtuutkaagunga. Nallukanka enkaam. Iwernga iignallu Qaygeghtaankut mangteghiita ukakaghaanilnguq Waamquutem allgeghvikeftaa. ‘I missed out on the building of the underground houses. And so, I don't know about them. But that (ruin) over there that is closer than Qaygeghtaq's house was where Waamquun was born.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:10)"	иӱырңа
iwerngangam	pos	IPA	but then whenever	particle; iwerngangam sakengneghmini tuunaqaa ‘but then whenever he gets something he gives some to her’	иӱырңаңам
iwerngaqun	pos	IPA	but; just couldn’t	particle; iwerngaqun aghtughaa itghunneghmeng ‘he just couldn't bring him inside’	иӱырңақун
iwhani	pos	IPA	and so; let’s see now	"particle; used when one is groping for the right words to express his thoughts;  Uukat kinenghhat, iwhani pinipigtut September-em uukaghtii. Kineghllagtestegpenaki qeghaataqelghiit eghqwaaghutkaghqaaluki. ‘“Atlantic” cod that had just dried, let's see, are really good when are caught in September. Before they would get too dry they would be bundled and stored.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:92); Aqaa iwhanit aghnaqeghrugaat, Pagaliit. Pagaliit Tuusaankuk Akumutaankuk panigak. ‘Aqaa was a, uhm, beloved woman of the Pagaliit clan. She was the daughter of Tuusaq and Akumutaq.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:22); = piwhani"	иӱхани
iwhani-	pos	IPA	to do like that	"used when groping for, or when one can’t think of, the right words; Maana aagraten tamaakut tanughqaqegkangit. Tanughqelluki maanaaqluki sameng iwhaniiqluki (sateglluki sallegtaqegkangit). ‘Well, they used to scru their floorings in the main living rooms. They scrub them and do like this, and do like that (clean them, they used to scrape them).’ (MRS. DELLA W. 22)"	ихӱани-
iyae	pos	IPA	eye; eye of a needle	iiska ‘my eye’; iyegka ‘my eyes2’; iiynga ‘his or its eye’; iiskek ‘his or its eyes2’; iyek aanqaghngalghiik ‘bulging eyes’; iyek pelleghmelnguuk ‘wide set eyes’; sikuq iistuqaq ‘needle with a big eye’	ияы
iyagh-	pos	IPA	to make a design; to write; to apply a tattoo; to go to school	#NAME?	иӥаӷ-
iyamsiqa-	pos	IPA	thankful; grateful	"emotional root; igamsiqayugtuq ‘he is thankful’; igamisiqayugvikaa ‘he expressed his thankfulness to her, he thanked her’; igamsiqayugutkaa ‘he is thankful for it’; igamsiqanaq ‘something that makes one thankful’; igamsiqanaghtuq ‘it makes one thankful’; = igamsiqa-"	иямсиқа-
iyamsiqanaghhalek	pos	IPA	"thank you very much; oh, how grateful that makes one!"	particle; =  igamsiqanaghhalek	иямсиқанаҳалык
iyaq	pos	IPA	design; tattoo (especially on a man's arm after he has caught a whale); book; schooling	#NAME?	ияқ
iyarutaagh-	pos	IPA	to drill a hole	iyarutaaghtuq ‘he drilled a hole’; iyarutaaghaa ‘he drilled a hole in it’ / = igarutaagh-	иярутāӷ-
iyarutaaq	pos	IPA	drill	"also dual, iyarutaaghek, for one drill; = igarutaaq"	иярутāқ
iyatagh-	pos	IPA	to be hungry	iyataghtuq ‘he is hungry’ / = igatagh-	иятаӷ-
iyataghnaq	pos	IPA	famine	#NAME?	иятаӷнақ
iyegaata	pos	IPA	eyeglasses	"used in the dual, iyegaatek,  for one pair of glasses; iyegaatelghutak ‘glasses case’"	иӥыгāта
iyegaatelek	pos	IPA	spectacled eider (Somateria fischeri)	No information given.	иӥыгāтылык
iyeksak	pos	IPA	starfish	No information given.	иӥыксяк
iyellugmete-	pos	IPA	to have bad eyesight	iyellugmetuq ‘he has bad eyesight’ / 	иӥыльюгмыты-
iyelluk	pos	IPA	eye trouble; diseased or otherwise bad eye	No information given.	иӥыльюк
iyem qalighaga	pos	IPA	cornea	No information given.	иӥым қалиӷага
iyengekestagh-	pos	IPA	for one's eyes to begin to open (as of a puppy)	No information given.	иӥыңыкыстаӷ-
iyesughnagh-	pos	IPA	to be irritating to the eyes	No information given.	иӥысюӷнаӷ-
iyetaq	pos	IPA	smoke-hole in roof of house	Chukotkan (R)	иӥытақ
iyeveli-	pos	IPA	to make the eyes figure in a game of cat’s cradle	No information given.	иӥывыли-
iyevleghun	pos	IPA	ring around the eye or dot above the eye (usually of a dog)	No information given.	иӥывлыӷун
ka	pos	IPA	ouch!	"= keka, ka em; exclamatory particle; ka, amigkun qumsekegtunga ‘ouch, I got pinched with the door’"	ка
ka em	pos	IPA	ouch!	"= keka, ka em; exclamatory particle; ka em, kaapqaghtung sikughqun ‘ouch, I poked myself with a needle’"	ка ым
kaa	pos	IPA	oh!	"exclamatory particle; expresses excitement or surprise or pleasure; whaaqruk elpek qenwatlu ‘oh, you’re here at last’; kaa, sangaawa allaaghllugaq? oh, what is that unique thing?; kaa, taawallu maaten saqeghllaataghta seghleghnaghhalek ‘oh, the horrid thing that happened to him’"	кā
kaaghte-	pos	IPA	to let the current drift a boat or an animal carcass	"unangkani kaaghfikluku tugumakanga ‘he let the current drift the seal that he caught, and then he retrieved it’; kaaghsimaluki pugleghumii ‘when they were drifting  (in their boat), an animal surfaced’"	кāҳты-
kaagkaq	pos	IPA	crown of head	cf. kakek	кāхкақ
kaagusiq	pos	IPA	club (for striking or hitting)	No information given.	кāгусиқ
kaakaa	pos	IPA	hush!; quiet!	particle	кāкā
kaakaangam	pos	IPA	quiet down now!	particle	кāкāңам
kaakw	pos	IPA	cow	"= kaawa; kaawet ‘cows’; the singular, kaakw, is a back formation from the plural which is also the plural of the alternate singular, kaawa, which is the form borrowed from English; dairy cows were brought to the village of Sireniki in Chukotka which expla"	кāкӱ
kaakwaq	pos	IPA	broken ice	Chukotkan (V&E)	кāкӱақ
Kaalghet	pos	IPA	cliffs (on Owalit Mt. and/or Iveka Mt. and Bunnell Cape  on St. Lawrence Is.)	see Map 4 in Appendices	Кāлӷыт
kaalghutaq	pos	IPA	cow-shed; barn	Chukotkan (R)	кāлӷутақ
kaalgugh-	pos	IPA	to haul dead whale or the like to shore	kaalgughtut ‘they hauled a dead whale to shore’; kaalgughaat ‘they hauled it to shore’ /	кāлгуӷ-
"kaalguun, kaalguutaq"	pos	IPA	hauling rope	No information given.	"кāлгӯн, кāлгӯтақ"
kaalguusiq	pos	IPA	hauling rope	No information given.	кāлгӯсиқ
kaallataqu-	pos	IPA	to arrive safely or opportunely	kaallataquukut taawa qagingughtesteghllagpenaan ‘we arrived safely before the surf on the beach got too high’	кāльятақу-
kaamae	pos	IPA	chewing gum	No information given.	кāмаы
kaame-	pos	IPA	to chew gum	kaamuq ‘he chewed gum’	кāмы-
kaamgalugte-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly go to get someone without success	"taginayukavek nalugvigmun kaamgalugtunga, iiwenwha aviitaquten ‘I went to the airport over and over in case you came in, but you weren’t there’; elngaatall kaamgalugutkamken ‘I keep on coming back for you’"	кāмгалухты-
kaamwaaq	pos	IPA	coltsfoot plant (Petasites frigidus)	No information given.	кāмӱāқ
kaana 	pos	IPA	"that one down there, near the water, to the west"	"base: kan-; restricted demonstrative pronoun;  relative singular pronoun: katum ‘(of) the one down there’; absolutive/relative plural: kaankut ‘the ones down there’; vocative: kaanyuq or kasuq ‘you, down there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: teskana or eskana ‘that one down there’; localis adverb: kanani ‘in the area down there’; terminalis adverb: kanavek ‘to down there’; vialis adverb: kaan'ggun ‘through down there’; ablative adverb: kaanken or kanaken ‘from down there’; interjectional: kana ‘there (down there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: teskanani or eskanani ‘there, down there’; kaan’ggun kaasimaat ‘they arrived down there; kaan’ggun tugugu ‘take a hold of it down there (as on the lower part of it)’"	кāна
kaangqite-	pos	IPA	"for snow or dust to get into the scalp, fur, or feathers"	kaangqitaa ‘snow or dust got into it’ / puvitenka umegneghmi kaangqisimii ‘snow got deep in my ruff in the storm’; temkaagka kaangqitkak pegnem ufsugagka ‘snow really got in my seal skin pants; I barely could shake it off’	кāңқиты-
kaangquq	pos	IPA	"core of tree; knot in wood; leader of village, group, etc.; headquarters"	cf. akangquq	кāңқуқ
kaangqwagh-	pos	IPA	to cross water or land by jumping from rock to rock or ice block to ice block	"kaangqwaghtuq ‘he jumped his way across’; kaangqwaghaa ‘he jumped his way across it’ / Sikuqwaaghhaat aghuliighwaaghluteng llangaqa suupeliighmi saltine cracker-et pugleghalghiit. Mekelghiighhaam ataasim pimakangi ilani, “Kaangqwaalta yeqay, sikut aghuliitnghwaaghtut!”’ ‘The ice floes were stationary like saltine crackers floating in soup. One boy said to his fellows, “Let’s cross jumping from piece to piece, as the ice floes are stationary!”’ (KALLAG. 82)"	кāқңӱаӷ-
kaanguq	pos	IPA	snow goose (Chen caerulescens)	No information given.	кāңуқ
kaape-	pos	IPA	to stab; to poke; to pierce a whale with a harpoon; to innoculate	kaapuq ‘he poked himself; he got a shot (inoculation)’; kaapaa ‘he poked it; he gave her a shot; pierced it (the whale)’ / kaaputuq ‘he poked something’; kaaputaa ‘he poked something into it;  he tacked something onto it’	кāпы-
kaapegragh- 	pos	IPA	to tap on something	No information given.	кāпыграӷ-
kaapelqaq	pos	IPA	"dish made with chopped frozen greens, shortening, and sugar"	No information given.	кāпыльқақ
kaapenta	pos	IPA	carpenter	Ighneqenghitaguu kaapentam? ‘Isn’t this the carpenter’s son?’ (Matthew 13:55)	кāпынта
kaapqaghte-	pos	IPA	to jab	sikukun kaapqaghtunga ‘I jabbed myself with a needle’	кāпқаҳты-
kaapute-	pos	IPA	to poke something; to bump (of fish); to go into sea swell (of boat)	No information given.	кāпуты-
kaaputfik	pos	IPA	electric outlet	No information given.	кāпутфик
kaapuvike-	pos	IPA	"to sew, or stitch on; to fasten or pin"	Chukotkan (R)	кāпувикы-
kaasilghaq	pos	IPA	mortar	cf. kaasitaq; used for pounding blubber and other foods	кāсилӷақ
kaasitaq	pos	IPA	pestle	cf. kaasilghaq; used for pounding blubber and other foods	кāситақ
kaaslaampae	pos	IPA	gas lamp	"used in the dual, kaaslaampek, for one such device"	кāсльāмпаы
kaate-	pos	IPA	to arrive; to reach or get to; to catch up with; to overtake	"kaatuq ‘he arrived’; kaataa ‘he arrived at it, reached it, got to it, caught up with him’ / Entaqun unuk ataasiq atughluku, aallghani whanikumaan kaatuq neminun. ‘Probably taking the whole night (to travel) she arrived at her house soon the next day.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:214); Mangteghat aliighluki kaatii, kaalluni mangteghamun qineghsalghiimi aghnaq qama qepghaghaqeftuq nateghmi. ‘She went over to the house after she had first noticed it, and reaching the house she looked and saw a woman working on the floor.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:206); anengaghmi angtalanga kaataa ‘he has caught up with his older brother in height now’; kaatutaa ‘he arrived with it’"	кāты-
kaatqaghtamalghii	pos	IPA	"hot-tempered, irascible person"	"Chukotkan (R); literally, ‘one who arrives quickly’, meaning here,  ‘is quick to anger’"	кāтқаҳтамалӷӣ
kaave-	pos	IPA	to topple; to collapse; to tumble down; to fall down; for there to be a rockslide or landslide	kaavuq ‘it tumbled down’ / kaavestaa ‘he made it tumble down’; kaavelleq ‘crushed stone resulting from landslide or collapse’; Naayghaq kaavumalghii ighivgaq. ‘The mountain had a rockslide last night.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 71)	кāвы-
kaavlak	pos	IPA	bearberry (Arctostaphylos sp.)	No information given.	кāвляк
kaaw-	pos	IPA	"to hit, especially with something other than the hand"	"kaawhtuq ‘he hit himself, it struck’; kaawaa ‘he hit it’ / kaagutaa ‘he hit it against something’; kaagutuq ‘he bumped into something’; kaagtughaa ‘he is hitting it (as with a hammer)’"	кāӱ-
kaawae	pos	IPA	cow	"kaawet ‘cows’; Enkaam kiyaghnengllaqat kaawaghaghsugnilngughmeng, aghqerraaqaatlu. ‘Then they created an idol in the form of a calf and offered sacrifices to it.’ (Acts 7.41); = kaakw (the form found more on the Chukotkan side)"	кāӱаы
kaawasaki	pos	IPA	old type of motorized boat; Kawasaki brand or type motorized vehicle	Chukotkan (V&E)	кāӱасаки
kaawhtaan	pos	IPA	club (for striking or hitting)	No information given.	кāӱьтāн
kaawngkagh-	pos	IPA	to jump; to leap	Chukotkan (R)	кāӱңкаӷ-
kaawraneq	pos	IPA	"small chunk of ice remaining when sea has become mostly ice-free, resulting from crushing or shattering in late spring; brash ice (?)"	see item 22 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	кāӱранық
"kaay, kay"	pos	IPA	oh dear!; boy oh boy	"particle; sometimes pronounced with vowel as in English ‘pay’; kay, angyaput tagillequt neqngunaamta talwa ‘oh dear, our boat will come and we don't even have any food ready’; kay, seghleghhalek legan whaa tengegkayuget aviinnaqut aqfaaghinaqet tuquyulghiimeng esla seghleghughtekanga ‘oh dear, it seems that the plane that was going to come for the deathly ill person cannot come due to the horrible weather’; Maalghuk ighuk ugugnaghaam ighukek neghumakek. Taagken aghnam pimakanga, aqsanga kenegraamaan, ""Kaay aqsan aafkaghllequq."" ‘He ate two legs of the shrew. Then the woman said to him, while poking his stomach, “Oh dear, your stomach will burst.”’ (UNGIPAGH. 80); Taagken taaqsata, kaay aghnaghaat qamaken anglinghhaghllugllaget aanleghaasalghiimeng, blue-meng (sunqaghyukegtameng) keniilluteng, qateghrakegtameng blouse-luteng (ggatelluteng). ‘Then when they were finished, boy oh boy, teenage girls from inside came out, wearing blue dresses with white blouses.’ (PANGEGH. 35)"	"кāӥ, каӥ"
kaaykaavrak	pos	IPA	"hermit crab (Pagurua ochotensis, Elassochirus tenuimanus, or Eslassochirus cavimanus)"	exact identification undetermined; questioned	кāӥкāврак
kafsagtagh-	pos	IPA	"to make shuffling, crinkling or rustling sound (s)"	kafsagtaghtuq ‘he made rustling sounds’ or ‘there is a rustling sound’; kafsagtaghaa ‘he's making the rustling sound of it’ /	кафсяхтаӷ-
kafsak	pos	IPA	shuffling sound; crinkling sound; rustling sound	kafsekengaq ‘a quiet rustling sound’; cf. kaftekrak; = kapsak	кафсяк
kaftekrak	pos	IPA	hail	kaftekragughtaa ‘it has begun hailing’	кафтыкшак
kaga-	pos	IPA	to be unruly; to be disordered; to be disheveled (of hair or the like)	kagaaq ‘it is disordered’ / kagastaa ‘he made it disordered’	кага-
kagagniigh-	pos	IPA	to try to breathe; to try to catch one’s breath	No information given.	кагагнӣӷ-
kagak	pos	IPA	hollow sound such as that made by whales blowing	kagaguutuq ‘it made a hollow sound’	кагак
kagalaqe-	pos	IPA	to cut and divide up meat from a catch so that it is ready to be put on sleds	"maklaget takuyaqmegteki kagalaqumakangat ‘when they went to the bearded seals, they cut and divided them up’; kagalaqluku maklagtaghteng utaqiit ilateng ‘they cut the bearded seal they’d caught and waited for their companions’"	кагалақы-
kagaqe-	pos	IPA	to remove gum material from baleen	"kagaqaa ‘he removed gum material from it’ / kagaqikuma suughqameng aqfallghaasi ‘when I take off some gum material from baleen, come get some’; suqat kagaqnaluki piiqanka ‘I am planning to take the gum off of the baleen’"	кагақы-
kagaragh-	pos	IPA	to catch or touch something or someone with the horns; to butt	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	кагараӷ-
kagasigh-	pos	IPA	to check a crab-line	kagasightuq ‘he checked crab-line’; kagasighaa ‘he checked it’ /	кагасиӷ-
kagaygute-	pos	IPA	to excitedly run about	yuuk kagaygutuq ‘the people excitedly ran about’	кагаӥгуты-
kagerghu	pos	IPA	hard crust on snow	Chukotkan	кагырӷу
kaghyagh-	pos	IPA	brag about	Chukotkan (V&E)	каӷьяӷ-
kagime-	pos	IPA	to crumble	kagimuq ‘it crumbled’ / kagimtaa ‘he crumbled it’; kagimqughtuq ‘he kept on crumbling something(s) up’; kagimqughaa ‘he kept on crumbling it up’	кагимы-
kagimkaq	pos	IPA	something that has been crumbled; sugar	No information given.	кагимкақ
kagimleghwaaq	pos	IPA	crushed ice in shore lead which is hard for boat to pass through; dense brash ice in shore lead	see item 23 in Oozeva et al. 2004	кагимлыӷӱāқ
kagimleq	pos	IPA	crushed ice in shore lead which is hard for boat to pass through; dense brash ice in shore lead	see item 23 in Oozeva et al. 2004	кагимлық
kagimquusiq	pos	IPA	crushing device	No information given.	кагимқӯсиқ
Kagkasaleq	pos	IPA	Kaghkusalik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Кахкасялық
kagpag-	pos	IPA	to pack; to store away somnething	"kagpagtuq ‘he packed’; kagpagaa ‘he's packed it into something’ / Tengegkayuget taginingatki kagpagmun waamegkaagunga. ‘When they said that the airplane was coming, I hurried with my packing.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 175); Nunami whani kagpagpenasi aklungimeng …. ‘Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth ….’ (Matthew 6.19)"	кахпаг-
kagpes-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kapesqwaaq, kapestaaghhaq, kapesug-"	кахпыс-
kagpesqwaaq	pos	IPA	very small opening; narrow bore rifle	No information given.	кахпысқӱāқ
"kagpestaaghhaq*, kagpestaaq"	pos	IPA	narrow opening or other such thing	"kagpestaaghhaaguq ‘it is narrow’; Iteghtek kagpestaaghhaghqun amigkun. Amik hell-mun ayuqelghii nuqtuuq, tuumkegtuqlu enkaam uglaq taakwagun igleghtaquq. ‘Enter through the narrow gate. The gate to Hell is wide, a comfortable path, and many go that way.’ (Matthew 7.13)"	"кахпыстāҳақ, кахпыстāқ"
kagpesug-	pos	IPA	to feel claustrophobic; to feel closed in upon; to feel breathless	kagpesugtuq ‘he feels claustrophobic’	кахпысюг-
kagsagmig-	pos	IPA	to whip repeatedly	No information given.	кахсягмиг-
kagsagte-	pos	IPA	to whip	kagsagtaa ‘he whipped it’ / = kaksagte-	кахсяхты-
kagsagun	pos	IPA	whip	No information given.	кахсягун
kagtagh-	pos	IPA	concealed; secluded	postural root; kagtaghtuq ‘he put himself into seclusion’; kagtaghtaa ‘he concealed it’; kagtaghngaaq ‘it is concealed’ or ‘he is in seclusion’	кахтаӷ-
kagtaghtaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to keep concealed	No information given.	кахтаҳтаӷӱāӷ-
kagu-	pos	IPA	to reach in	kaguuq ‘he reached in’; kawaa ‘he reached into it’ / Enkaam taakum kelliin meghanun kagukaq. Meghem saamken teghhaneng nunameng tugulluni sivuqaa. ‘So he reached into the waters and scooped up a handful of soil bottom of the sea.’ (KALLAG. 2)	кагу-
kaguugh-	pos	IPA	to reach in and keep one’s hand(s) in (as to feel around for something)	kaguughtuq ‘he reached in and kept his hands there’; kaguughaa ‘he reached into it and kept his hands there’ /	кагӯӷ-
kaguuragh-	pos	IPA	to explore by reaching in; to feel around inside	No information given.	кагӯраӷ-
kakaa	pos	IPA	listen!	exclamatory particle	какā
kakafketaq	pos	IPA	one who panics easily	No information given.	какафкытақ
kakaq	pos	IPA	woman's underpants; fancy panties	"used in the dual, kakak, for one pair of underpants; also slang for vagina"	какақ
kakavaatagh-	pos	IPA	to be extremely panicky	No information given.	какавāтаӷ-
kakave-	pos	IPA	to panic	kakavuq ‘he panicked’ / kakaftaa ‘he caused her to panic’; kakavutkaa ‘he panicked on account of it’	какавы-
kakeg-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kakeglluk, kakeghqe-"	какыг-
kakeggmillaghqe-	pos	IPA	to make one’s nose bleed	Chukotkan (R)	какыхмьильяҳқы-
kakeghqe-	pos	IPA	to have a bloody nose; to have a nosebleed	No information given.	какыҳқы-
kakeglliigh-	pos	IPA	to have a runny or snotty nose	kakeglliightuq ‘he has a snotty nose’ /	какыхльӣӷ-
kakegllugigh-	pos	IPA	to wipe or blow one's nose	kakegllugightuq ‘he wiped his (own) nose’; kakegllugighaa ‘he wiped his (another's) nose’ /	какыхльюгиӷ-
kakegllugiitaq	pos	IPA	handkerchief; tissue	No information given.	какыхльюгӣтақ
kakegllugtu-	pos	IPA	to have a congested nose	kakegllugtuuq ‘he has a stuffed nose’ /	какыхльюхту-
kakeglluk	pos	IPA	runny mucus; snot	No information given.	какыхльюк
kakegsuk	pos	IPA	the tip of something	qateghyiighaq napaqam kakegsugaakun nalugtuq ‘a small bird landed on the top tip of a pole’; kakegsugmi qakma yuuk qineghpeghwaaghaquq ‘the man on top of the house is looking around diligently (as with binoculars)’	какыхсюк
kakegte-	pos	IPA	to have a bloody nose; to have a nosebleed	No information given.	какыхты-
kakek	pos	IPA	"apex or uppermost part where roof poles meet and are lashed together in the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	cf. kaagkaq	какык
kakelighte-	pos	IPA	to have a cold	No information given.	какылиҳты-
kaki	pos	IPA	heavy cloth	Aghnam ighneni kakigneng qiipaghiighaa. ‘The woman made a cover parka of heavy cloth for her son.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 72)	каки
kaki-	pos	IPA	to sew	kakiiq ‘he sewed’; kakii ‘he sewed it’ / Mekestaaghhaalunga liitunga kakimeng. ‘When I was small I learned sewing.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)	каки-
kakiigh-	pos	IPA	to keep on sewing	No information given.	какӣӷ-
kakiiq	pos	IPA	fish spear; fork	No information given.	какӣқ
kakiqraasiq	pos	IPA	awl	No information given.	какиқшāсиқ
kakivike-	pos	IPA	to sew something onto (it); to fasten a charm onto (him)	"kakivikaa ‘he sewed something onto it, fastened a charm onto him’ /"	какивикы-
kaksaate-	pos	IPA	"to throw something (belt, rope, etc.) over someone; to whip"	Chukotkan (R);  =kagsaate	какся̄ты-
kaksagte-	pos	IPA	to whip	kaksagtaa ‘he whipped it’ / = kagsagte-	каксяхты-
"kakuuy, kakguuy"	pos	IPA	oh my!	"exclamatory particle; expresses surprise, fear, wonder or dismay at what one has experienced; = kuy"	"какӯӥ, какхӯӥ"
kalanta	pos	IPA	calendar	No information given.	калянта
kalefkaghte-	pos	IPA	to sink suddenly	kalefkaghtuq ‘it suddenly sank’/	калыфкаҳты-
kaleftaq	pos	IPA	small plain (running?) stitch	No information given.	калыфтақ
kalerae	pos	IPA	color	No information given.	калыраы
kaleru-	pos	IPA	to brag about one’s possessions	aghnam aqelqani kalerusimakanga saghyamineng ‘the women bragged to her guest about her possessions’	калыру-
kaleve-	pos	IPA	"to sink into water, mud, snow, etc.; to drown"	kalevuq ‘it sank’ / kaleftaa ‘he made it sink’	калывы-
"kalevnaq, kalefkagnaq"	pos	IPA	snow into which sled runners can sink while traveling	No information given.	"калывнақ, калыфкагнақ"
kalilae	pos	IPA	dalmation dog	No information given.	калиляы
kallagneq	pos	IPA	drum-beat; rhythm	kallagneghet ‘drum-beats’	кальягнық
kallagte-	pos	IPA	to drum (and sing); to beat the drum	kallagtuq ‘he beat the drum’ /	кальяхты-
kalleghta	pos	IPA	a certain ball game	called aaghqutaq by Chukotkans and by some St. Lawrence Islanders	кальыҳта
kallite-	pos	IPA	to be thundering	No information given.	кальиты-
kallngugh-	pos	IPA	assembled; gathered	postural root; kallngughtut ‘they gathered’; kallngughtii ‘he gathered them’; kallngughngaat ‘they are gathered’; kallngughtiiq ‘he gathered people or things together’	кальңуӷ-
kallugughte-	pos	IPA	for there to start to be thunder	kallugughtuq or kallugughtaa ‘it’s starting to thunder’ /	кальюгуҳты-
kalluk	pos	IPA	thunder	"also dual, kallugek, for a single clap or peal of thunder; kallugek nagaqughagka ‘I heard the thunder clap’; alinguq kallugegneng ‘he is afraid of thunder’"	кальюк
kalngagaq	pos	IPA	storage bag; burlap sack; gunny sack	No information given.	калңагақ
kalngagmig-	pos	IPA	to put into a sealskin bag	kalngagmigaa ‘he put it into a bag’	калңагмиг-
kalngagtaq	pos	IPA	backpack	traditional or modern	калңахтақ
kalngak1	pos	IPA	sealskin bag	the skin is cut around the seal's neck and removed that way and then the flippers are cut off and the various holes sewn up and a new opening is made and reinforced across the upper front	калңак1
kalngak2	pos	IPA	shark	perhaps the same as kalngak1 ‘sealskin sack’ due to similarity in appearance with the shark's mouth resembling the sealskin bag's opening	калңак2
kalngapegaq	pos	IPA	cloth bag	Chukotkan (R)	калңапыгақ
kalugllaka	pos	IPA	"oh, how big!"	particle	калюхльяка
kaluka	pos	IPA	large knife used for butchering whales	#NAME?	калюка
kamagragh-	pos	IPA	to butt	No information given.	камаграӷ-
kamagraq	pos	IPA	elephant	"this noun form, with its very specific meaning, is a direct nominalization of the verb form which has the more general meaning ‘to butt’; the elephant is known only through contact with outsiders"	камаграқ
kamagriitaq	pos	IPA	whip used to drive a reindeer herd	Chukotkan (R)	камагрӣтақ
kamagrin	pos	IPA	mammoth; mastodon; buried tusk of mammoth or mastodon	"= kamagrita, Chukotkan; cf. kamagraq"	камагрин
kamagrita	pos	IPA	mammoth; mastodon; buried tusk of mammoth or mastodon	"= kamagrin, Chukotkan; cf. kamagraq"	камагрита
kameg-	pos	IPA	to put on skin-boots	kamegtuq ‘he put on boots’; kaamgaa ‘he put boots on her ‘/ 	камыг-
kamegragh-	pos	IPA	to drive reindeer with a sharp stick	Chukotkan (V & E)	камыграӷ-
kamegtaaq	pos	IPA	ceremonial object of bone shaped like tip of whale fluke	"blackened with whale eye fluid, attached to a rope on a pole (aghvegheqetaq), swung to the four corners of the house when a whale is caught. cf. kamek"	камыхтāқ
kamek	pos	IPA	skin-boot	kaamga ‘his boot’; kamegkek (or kaamgek) ‘his boots2’; kaamka ‘my boot’; kaamgegka ‘my boots2’; kaamgightuq ‘he took off his boots’	камык
kamekruk	pos	IPA	winkle; whelk	No information given.	камыкшук
kamepik	pos	IPA	woman's knee-high winter boot with bleached sealskin top	No information given.	камыпик
kameraaq	pos	IPA	rubber boot; shoe	kameraaghqek ‘his shoes or rubber boots2’; kameraaghegka ‘my shoes rubber boots2’	камырāқ
kamgusluk	pos	IPA	person who runs errands; errand boy	"Ayumiq nukalpigat kamguslukaqiit kiyang ‘long ago, they usually used the young men for running errands’; anglinaqnguluni kamguslugukaaftuq ‘when he was growing up, he was an errand boy’"	камгусльюк
kamiigh-	pos	IPA	to make boots	No information given.	камӣӷ-
kamulugaq	pos	IPA	worn-out skin-boot	Kaalluki piyaqminiki iimqaghneghem ilungani kamulugalghun ukiqeghllakat. ‘When she got to them (she saw that) inside the depression there were worn-out skin boots with holes in them.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198)	камулугақ
kanagalqwaaq	pos	IPA	fibula	No information given.	канагальқӱāқ
kanagaq	pos	IPA	shin; tibia	No information given.	канагақ
kanagayaaq	pos	IPA	shin-high skin-boot	No information given.	канагая̄қ
kanagh-	pos	IPA	to step through soft ice or into a hole 	may imply drowning as well	канаӷ-
kanagha-	pos	IPA	to walk with difficulty through soft snow	kanaghastaa mughayaghllagem aglaghyan ighivgaq elpesinun ‘the soft deep snow made him wade and struggle through on his way to your house yesterday’	канаӷа-
kanaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to put (it) in quickly	No information given.	канаӷаҳты-
kanaghite-	pos	IPA	to sink in the ocean and be hard to pull up (of a heavy sea mammal)	kanaghitkaq ayveq pegnem sayugumakangat ‘they barely pulled up the large walrus that sank’; naghullegluku kalevluni kanaghisimalghii ‘they harpooned it and it sank and was hard to pull up’	канаӷиты-
kanaghtaagh-	pos	IPA	to keep in a container	No information given.	канаҳтāӷ-
kanaghtaaghvik	pos	IPA	prison	Chukotkan (R)	канаҳтāӷвик
kanaghtaq	pos	IPA	food put into a container to ferment	No information given.	канаҳтақ
kanaghte-	pos	IPA	to put into container	kanaghtaa ‘he put it in’ / aghnam kanaghquutqaa neqa aavguqaq qulmesiitmun ‘the woman is putting cut-up pieces of meat into the cooking pot’	канаҳты-
kanaghutaq	pos	IPA	sleeping bag	Chukotkan	канаӷутақ
kanakiiwhte-	pos	IPA	to stare downwards with the head bent down; to keep one’s eyes lowered	qugayunghilngughestun taana quunpeng kanakiiwhluni ‘that person is always looking down just as if he’s ignoring everyone’; efqughyunghitem kanakiiwhluni naghughtii esghaghyukaghpenaki ‘he didn’t want to look at them when he was passing by because he had a grudge against them’	канакӣӱты-
kanalighneq	pos	IPA	lower part or end	No information given.	каналиӷнық
kanavagh-	pos	IPA	to move downwards; to go out to sea; for west wind to blow	No information given.	канаваӷ-
kanavaq	pos	IPA	west; west wind	No information given.	канавак
kanegh-	pos	IPA	to frost	kaneghtuq or kaanghaa ‘it frosted’ /	каныӷ-
"Kaneghyengesi, Kaneghyengesiq"	pos	IPA	December	"possibly literally, ‘time of small frost’; also listed in various sources as October-November, and November"	"Каныӷӥыңыси, Каныӷӥыңысиқ"
kaneq	pos	IPA	frost	No information given.	канық
kangeq1	pos	IPA	underhair; inner bird down	qawaagem melqwan kaangha aliightuq ghhiitaghyalghiimi ‘the down showed when the bird's feathers were plucked’	каңық1
kangeq2	pos	IPA	cause; heart of the matter; principle behind something	kaangghituq taakut aghivatellghat ‘there is no cause for their quarrel’	каңық2
kangestiiqu-	pos	IPA	to go to a place bringing one’s supplies and equipment in several trips	kangestiiqumeng pegnem kaatukut ‘we barely got there by bringing our gear and coming back and bringing more’	каңыстӣқу-
kanggha	pos	IPA	excitement; elation; mirth; joy	No information given.	каңӷа
kangghalugte-	pos	IPA	to feel better after an illness	No information given.	каңӷалюхты-
kangghaluk	pos	IPA	elation	No information given.	каңӷалюк
kangghuk	pos	IPA	crunching noise; rales (raspy scraping sounds made when lungs are full of fluid)	ilangquq kangghutun tamaagaa ‘she made crunching noises when chewing on the ice’	каңӷук
kangghwaak	pos	IPA	oldsquaw duck (Clangula hyemalis)	kangghwaagniightuq ‘he hunted oldsquaw’; kangghwaagtuq ‘he caught oldsquaw’; kangghwaaliightuq ‘he cooked oldsquaw’; kangghwaagtughtuq ‘he ate oldsquaw’	каңӷӱāк
Kangighaghpak	pos	IPA	bay at inland end of Aghnaghak Lagoon (Aghnaghaak) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Каңиӷаҳпак
kangighaq	pos	IPA	corner; cove; inlet	No information given.	каңиӷақ
Kangighaq	pos	IPA	Kangeeghuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	каңиӷақ
kangighin	pos	IPA	bight in ice; ice-free cove in shore ice or in large ice floe	see item 24 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	каңиӷин
kangightelleq	pos	IPA	knot used to make loop at end of rope; bowline	#NAME?	каңиҳтыльық
kangightilleq	pos	IPA	knot used to make loop at end of rope; bowline	#NAME?	каңиҳтильық
Kangii	pos	IPA	Kangee Camp or Camp Collier and Kangee Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Каңӣ
kangii-	pos	IPA	to take away from oneself	Chukotkan (V&E)	каңӣ-
kangin	pos	IPA	end of open-water cove or open lead in ice; edge of open water within the ice	see item 25 in list in Oozeva et al. 2004	каңин
kangiq	pos	IPA	indentation on shoreline; loop at end of rope	tapghaam kangii tagivaghhu; uygunaqaqa ‘hand me the loop on the rope; I’ll add some more rope to it’	каңиқ
kangiqliq*	pos	IPA	thing at inner end; wisdom tooth; molar	No information given.	каңиқльиқ
kangisqaq	pos	IPA	back of sled	Chukotkan	каңисқақ
kangita	pos	IPA	wedge shaped open water to the side of where pack ice touches shore ice	"used in the dual, kangitek, for one such area of water"	каңита
kangkasighpak	pos	IPA	tornado; cyclone	No information given.	каңкасиҳпак
kangkasiq	pos	IPA	whirlwind	No information given.	каңкасиқ
kangl-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kangllaagh-, kanglluugte-, kanglu-; cf. kangsugh-"	каңл-
kangllaagh-	pos	IPA	to close in on something	Chukotkan	каңлья̄ӷ-
kanglluute-	pos	IPA	to stand or crowd around something in large numbers	kanglluutut ‘they crowded around’; kanglluutaat ‘they crowded around it’ / 	каңлью̄ты-
"kanglu-, kangllu-"	pos	IPA	to surround; to crowd around	kanglaat ‘they are surrounding it’ / kangliigut ‘they are surrounding something’	"каңлю-, каңлью-"
kangpesae	pos	IPA	compass	"used in the dual, kangpesek, for one compass"	каңпыса
Kangqaaq	pos	IPA	Kongkok Bay and Basin on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Каңқāқ
kangqwaaq	pos	IPA	small pieces of ice in the sea loosely clustered together; shuga (?)	cf. kaangwqagh-	каңқӱāқ
kangraak	pos	IPA	"crunching, squeaky, raspy, grating noise"	"terakterek qiifqaghllutek kangraatun uyghaget sementekun kagimsimiita kangghuguuteghllallghegkenka tupagpagtesteghllagaagnenga ‘as the tractor made a squeaky sudden turn on the gravelly cement, there was a grating sound that startled me’"	каңрāк
kangsugh-	pos	IPA	to be too large to fit in an opening	kangsughtuq ‘it is too large to fit’; kangsughaa ‘it is to large to fit through it’ / cf. kangl-	каңсюӷ-
kangsumqaghte-	pos	IPA	to get stuck trying to go through an opening	No information given.	каңсюмқаҳты-
kangsuute-	pos	IPA	to crowd together in a small area	No information given.	каңсю̄ты-
kangulga	pos	IPA	south polar skua (Catharacta maccormicki)	Chukotkan (V & E)	каңулга
kangyaaqe-	pos	IPA	to see (him) off on a trip	Chukotkan	каңья̄қы-
kaniiyugte-	pos	IPA	to jealously guard one’s priority in a situation	kaniiyuglluni sivuliinaqutka ilani pistegpenaki ‘he tries to remain as the first with out letting others a chance’; kaniiyuglluni weninguq ellnga pillequq ‘he will (do it) because he has been jealously guarding his priority (in these matters)’	канӣюхты-
kanivaan	pos	IPA	diaphram (anatomical)	"used in the plural, kanivaatet, for one diaphram"	канивāн
kanti	pos	IPA	candy	also used in Chukotka	канти
kanuk	pos	IPA	blood spot or streak	No information given.	канук
kanuka	pos	IPA	large knife used for butchering whales	#NAME?	канука
kanuughqe-	pos	IPA	to accidently get blood on; to bloody	kanuughquq ‘he bloodied himself’; kanuughqaa ‘he bloodied it’ /	канӯҳқы-
kanuuguute-	pos	IPA	to bleed	No information given.	канӯгӯты-
kanuyaaghruk	pos	IPA	gun cartridge shell	No information given.	кануя̄ӷрук
kanuyae	pos	IPA	copper	No information given.	кануяы
kape-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kaape-, kapeghte-, kapeqengeltaq, kapeqlak, kapugh-"	капы-
kapeghte-	pos	IPA	to pound on something repeatedly; to pound blubber to make it render faster	kapeghtaa ‘he pounded it (blubber)’ / kapeghtiiq ‘he pounded some blubber’	капыҳты-
kapeghtisiq	pos	IPA	blubber pounder	No information given.	капыҳтисиқ
kapeqengeltaq	pos	IPA	"dotted material; paresthesia (""pins and needles"" feeling in flesh)"	No information given.	капықыңыльтақ
kapeqlak	pos	IPA	dotted thing	No information given.	капықльяк
kapesegak	pos	IPA	parka made from red-dyed reindeer skin worn over woman’s overalls	No information given.	капысыгак
Kapsagfik	pos	IPA	July; August	Chukotkan; said to mean ‘month when plants become fragile’; cf. kape-	Капсяхфик
kapsagtagh-	pos	IPA	to rustle	Chukoktan (R)	капсяхтаӷ-
kapsak	pos	IPA	crunching noise; rustling sound	in particular when dry plants are stepped on; = kavsak	карсяк
kapugh-	pos	IPA	to stab repeatedly; to poke repeatedly; to innoculate people	No information given.	капуӷ-
kaputaghaq	pos	IPA	short-tailed shearwater (Puffinus tenuirostris)	cf. kape-	капутаӷақ
kaputaq	pos	IPA	awl	Chukotkan (V & E)	капутақ
Karakae	pos	IPA	Koryak; American Indian	American Indians are the second ethnic group to the east past Inupiaqs as Koryaks are the second ethnic group to the west past Chukchis and hence the the name for Koryaks has been extended by some to mean also American Indian (though Iintiyaghmii (q.v.) is more common)	Каракаы
kargae	pos	IPA	hole in garment	Chukotkan	каргаы
kasivag-	pos	IPA	to encounter or meet head-on unexpectedly	kasivagaa ‘he met it or her head-on’ / kasivagutuq or kasivagiiq ‘he met something or someone head-on’	касиваг-
kaspeneq	pos	IPA	"one of the eight seams of the aagra, the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	Chukotkan (R)	каспынық
kaspigpak	pos	IPA	large overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ice frozen into the sea ice surface	see item 26 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	каспихпак
kaspik	pos	IPA	overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ice frozen into the sea ice surface; roofing shingle	see item 27 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004; cf. qaspighte-	каспик
kaspikengeltaq	pos	IPA	small overlapping upended and angled piece of thin ice frozen into the sea ice surface	see item 28  on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	каспикыңыльтақ
kaspugte-	pos	IPA	to pass through a specific time or place; to go around; to go through completely from beginning to end; complete (a course of action)	kaspugtaa ataasiq tanqiq ‘he went through one month’; uzivuq kenlanga kaspugtelleghminun taana angqaperuk uzivyaghaq ‘he went around the whole circumference’; college-elluni kaspugtaa ‘he completed going to college’	каспухты-
kasug-	pos	IPA	to bump into something hard; for surf to hit shore; for waves to hit boat; to club (hit hard)	kasugaa ‘he bumped it; the waves hit it’ / kasugiiq ‘he hit something’; kasugutuq ‘he bumped his head on something hard’	касюг-
kasughqu-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly hit (as waves on a cliff)	No information given.	касюҳқу-
kasugnaq	pos	IPA	rough splashing water that one goes through by boat; swells that hit the side of a boat spraying water in	No information given.	касюгнақ
kasugun	pos	IPA	club for hitting	No information given.	касюгун
katag-	pos	IPA	to empty or dump a container outside	katagaa ‘he dumped it outside’ / katagiiq ‘he dumped something outside’	катаг-
katagvik	pos	IPA	dump	No information given.	катагвик
katam	pos	IPA	like; just like; one's own	"particle; katam whaten ‘just like this’; Legan aga anengaat taakwagun nalugutqaghtaghtuq kiwavek uteghvanun. Tawaten katam legan ellngallu nukalpigaq nalugutaaghtuq ighungitgun aghnaghaat. Their older brother would just dive further back towards the east. The young man too just like that would land in between the legs of the girls. (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:4); Tuquneghmeggni mesii qugaaghqwaakayuguniluki, ilangi katam juice-estun ayuqniiqanka. ‘When they ferment, their juice would become quite sour; I would say some of it was just like (orange) juice.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:90); … nunami whani, katam qilagmelngughestun. ‘… on earth as in heaven.’ (Matthew 6.10)"	катам
katamngwaaq	pos	IPA	something that is just right; something that fits perfectly	"kameraaghqek katamngwaaghuk ‘his rubber boots are a perfect fit’; Qavngaghtarugllaget sikuunka Pedersen-meng ima tukfighat, pinit taakeghllanghilnguut, taakeghpaget katamngwaaghet kenukeggneghilnguut pinit. ‘These old (glover’s) needles that I bought from Pedersen are good, not too long, just right in length, good without (overly) sharp edges.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:94)"	катамңāқ
katamqun	pos	IPA	barely; only	particle;  katamqun taawa qayuusim imaghhaa siipsimalghii pagunghaq saghnakaq ‘there are only a cup left of the berries that were picked’; Maaten ilangani nunalgutangit qamaglluteng Quyillegqaasimalghiit. Katamqun yaywaalingiighhaak  unegsimalghiik. ‘Then one time their fellow villagers all went off with the Chukchis. Only the two little orpans remained behind.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 61)	катамқун
kate-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kaate-, katelghaate-, kateqneq, katengsi-"	каты-
katelghaate-	pos	IPA	to come as a group	"Upenghami allaghhiinaq qawaak katelghaasagutkaq, ighnilaghasagutkaq. ‘In the spring all sorts of birds came as a group and begane to have young.’ (KALLAG. 6)"	катылӷāты-
katengsi-	pos	IPA	to gather or save up something	katengsikestaa pilleghqaghpek sivungani ‘gather your things before you leave’	катыңси-
kateqneq	pos	IPA	herd of walrus in water	No information given.	катықньық
kavenghu	pos	IPA	"kind of fish called ""lake loach"""	Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined	кавынӷу
Kavezruk	pos	IPA	former village on the western shore of Providenia Bay in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Кавызрук
kavigh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kavighqwaa, kavighqwaa-, kavighruk, kavighte-, kavighuute-, kavighyaak, kavighzik-, kavilleq, kavimsiiq, kaviiq, kaviqrak, kavirrakegtaq, kavisengwaaq, kavitaraak, kavite-, kavitun"	кавиӷ-
kavighqwaa-	pos	IPA	to blush; to redden	"kavighqwaaguq or kavighqwaagaa ‘it turned red, he blushed’ /"	кавиҳқӱā-
kavighruggalek	pos	IPA	"oh, what a pity!"	Chukotkan (R); exclamatory particle	кавиӷрухалык
kavighruk	pos	IPA	reddish thing	No information given.	кавиӷрук
kavighte-	pos	IPA	to redden; to dye red	"kavightuq ‘it reddened’; kavightaa ‘he reddened it, it became red’ /"	кавиҳты-
kavighun	pos	IPA	red dye; alder bark used to dye skin red	No information given.	кавиӷун
kavighuute-	pos	IPA	to suddenly emit red light or become reddish	No information given.	кавиӷӯты-
kavighyaak	pos	IPA	ochre	No information given.	кавиӷья̄к
kavighzik	pos	IPA	pink color; light reddish color	No information given.	кавиӷзик
kaviipik	pos	IPA	red fox (Vulpes fulva)	No information given.	кавӣпик
kaviiq	pos	IPA	fox; especially arctic or white fox (Alopex lagopus)	No information given.	кавӣқ
kavilleq	pos	IPA	egg yolk	Qaqsungiim manigi qamagtevzighluteng kavillghhuut. ‘The eggs of the kittiwake are almost all yolk.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 94)	кавильық
kavilnguq*	pos	IPA	red thing; the color red	"Taakuk qiipaghaak gaaghusikek puygunaanghilkegka. Kavilnguuk piitesiighameng igalgek qatelghiimeng, sungaghyukegtameng, sungaghyaagmeng. ‘I will never forget the cover parka that she wore for cooking. It was red with small flowers printed on it in white, blue and green.’ (SULUWET 13)"	кавилңуқ
kavimsiiq	pos	IPA	orange color	No information given.	кавимсӣқ
kaviqrak	pos	IPA	red dot; measles	No information given.	кавиқшак
kavirrakegtaq	pos	IPA	bright red color	No information given.	кавишакыхтақ
kavisengwaaq	pos	IPA	"men's knee-high, fur-side in, red-colored summer boot; brick"	the ‘brick’ meaning is Chukotkan	кависыңӱāқ
kavitaraak	pos	IPA	reddish thing; reddish dog	No information given.	кавитарāк
kavite-	pos	IPA	to be red	kavituq ‘it is red’ /	кавиты-
kavitun	pos	IPA	being red	"particle; kavitun ayuquq ‘it is red, it’s like it’s red’"	кавитун
kavlek	pos	IPA	"loud clicking, clattering or knocking sound or noise"	"kavletun ‘like a loud clicking, clattering or knocking’"	кавлык
kavyug-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kavyugite-, kavyuguute-"	кавьюг-
kavyugite-	pos	IPA	to be soft-spoken	kavyugituq ‘he is soft-spoken’ /	кавьюгиты-
kavyuguute-	pos	IPA	to speak softly	No information given.	кавьюгӯты-
kawaaq	pos	IPA	skin of  young bearded seal	used for making rope	каӱāқ
kayaaghtaagh-	pos	IPA	to flex the arm muscle	No information given.	кая̄ҳтāӷ-
kayaali-	pos	IPA	to weaken; to get weak	kayaaliiq ‘he got weak’ /	кая̄ли-
kayaalqe-	pos	IPA	to beat; to conquer; to outdo; to win	"kayaalqaa ‘he beat him (in a game, etc.)’/ kayaalqiiq ‘he beat someone’"	кая̄льқы-
kayaalqiiraaghute-	pos	IPA	to compete	Chukotkan (R)	кая̄льқӣрāӷуты-
kayaaq	pos	IPA	biceps	Chukotkan	кая̄қ
kayaate-	pos	IPA	to be weak	kayaatuq ‘he is weak’ / 	кая̄ты-
kayaghqagh-	pos	IPA	to hope	No information given.	каяҳқаӷ-
kayagte-	pos	IPA	to urge; to send someone on an errand	kayagtaq ‘someone sent on an errand’	каяхты-
kayalaawi-	pos	IPA	to become weak; weaken	of a person; ikfiqliighlleghma entaqun kayalaawighllaguunga ‘I guess I am weakened from my struggle (sickness)’; naayghamun mayulghii kayalaawiiq qaygeghtegpenani ‘he was becoming weak while climbing the moutain with out even reaching the top’	каӥалāӱи-
kayalnga-	pos	IPA	to go somewhere without letting anyone know where	taghnughhaat kayalnganaqeghllaguut ‘the children are constantly going to places without letting any one know’; kayalngatutmineng qenwat iflangwaaghamalghii ‘he got lost because he never told anyone where he was going’	каӥалңа-
kayanagh-	pos	IPA	to be out of condition	"kayanaghwaaghuuten wiin apeghiiquvek pilghaaten ‘you are not in shape, so don’t go until you are ready’"	каӥанаӷ-
kayanaq	pos	IPA	chaos	No information given.	каянақ
kayanqun	pos	IPA	something to be added	"Llaaghanwha legan kayanqun maana ukighqughaqegkefut, akingilngughmun samun neqmun ukigtelleghput pikayugukefut, enkaam estuwaghput ifliingigalnguq. ‘We could lower the profit margin (if need be); we would adjust it to the value of the food item and then the store wouldn’t suffer a loss.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:80)"	каянқун
kayanqutkaghqaq	pos	IPA	something to be added; trim material	No information given.	каянқуткаҳқақ
kayaqagh-	pos	IPA	to encourage; to shout encouragement	Chukotkan (R)	каяқаӷ-
kayeme-	pos	IPA	to urge; to encourage; to aid; to help	kayemaa ‘he encouraged her’ /	каӥымы-
kayemghhagh-	pos	IPA	to move (something) by leaning and pushing on it	Chukotkan (R)	каӥымҳаӷ-
"kayemugh-, kayemghagh-"	pos	IPA	to keep encouraging	No information given.	"каӥымуӷ-, каӥымӷаӷ-"
kayengenghaghhaq	pos	IPA	sculpin	No information given.	каӥыңынӷаҳақ
kayengestaq	pos	IPA	small fish of some type	exact identification undetermined	каӥыңыстақ
kayepghagh-	pos	IPA	to scoot oneself along the ice on a small sled pushing with sticks or the like against the ice	"kayepghaasit unaghsighhaat uugnangi tuquuqameng ipegsaqameng nuvulget ‘the pushing sticks are made with sharpened nails on one bottom end’; cf. kayeme-, and ayapghaataq"	каӥыпҳаӷ-
kayi-	pos	IPA	to cook (chopped seal blubber) to extract oil; to make oil from	kayii ‘he made oil from it’ /	каӥи-
kayiipa	pos	IPA	store-bought bread; flat cake; doughnut	Chukotkan; cf. kayi-	каӥӣпа
kayngaaghaq*	pos	IPA	brown bear cub	No information given.	каӥңāӷақ
kayngae	pos	IPA	brown bear (Ursus arctos)	kayngetuq ‘he caught a brown bear’; the brown bear is found in Chukotka but only very rarely encountered on St. Lawrence Is.	каӥңаы
kayngu-	pos	IPA	embarrassed; ashamed	"emotional root; kaynguyugtuq ‘he feels embarrassed, ashamed, timid’; kayngunaghtuq ‘it causes shame’; kayngukaa or kaynguyukaa ‘he feels shame over it’"	каӥңу-
kayngumiqe-	pos	IPA	to be embarrassed	No information given.	каӥңумиқы-
kayngungite-	pos	IPA	to not be shy; to not be embarrassed or ashamed	No information given.	каӥңуңиты-
kayngusaghagh-	pos	IPA	to make a fool of oneself	No information given.	каӥңусяӷаӷ-
kayngusleghagh-	pos	IPA	to become embarrassed by one’s actions but still continue them	"yiillgimaluku yuuk iteghluni kayngusleghaghluni nagneghusimakanga ‘he was gossiping about him and he walked in so he (the gossiper) was embarrassed, but he continued gossiping about him’"	каӥңуслыӷаӷ-
kayngutaq	pos	IPA	timid person	No information given.	каӥңутақ
kayu	pos	IPA	sculpin; bullhead; any ocean fish (especially in the sculpin family)	No information given.	каю
kayu-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kayaaq, kayaate-, kayun, kayunge-"	каю-
kayun	pos	IPA	helper; aid	No information given.	каюн
kayunge-	pos	IPA	to become faster; to accelerate	"kayunguq ‘it got faster’ / kayungtaa ‘it made it faster’; atughtet ikayughyaqmegteki leganqun kayungtiit ‘they responded to the drummers, so they drummed faster’; ivenruutek kayungtikek ‘accelerate the motor’"	каюңы-
kayupik	pos	IPA	Pacific staghorn sculpin (Leptocottus armatus)	No information given.	каюпик
kayusigh-	pos	IPA	to help	kayusighaa ‘he helped her’ / kayusighiiq ‘he is helping’	каюсиӷ-
kayusiite-	pos	IPA	to help out	kayusiituq ‘he helped’; kayusiitaa ‘he helped her out’ /	каюсӣты-
kayusilleq	pos	IPA	grace	word used in Bible translation	каюсильық
kazegh-	pos	IPA	to go out	Chukotkan; questioned	казыӷ-
kazifkagte-	pos	IPA	to walk around something	Chukotkan (R); yugem naayghaq kazifkagsimaa ‘the man walked around the mountain’	казифкахты-
kazifte-	pos	IPA	to spin	kaziftaa ‘he spun it’ /	казиты-
kaziva	pos	IPA	religious ceremony	Chukotkan (R); cf. kazive-	казива
kazivaalug-	pos	IPA	to get dizzy	kazivaalugtuq ‘he got dizzy’ / kazivaalugtestaa ‘it made him dizzy’; kazivaalugsimaanga ‘I became dizzy’	казивāлюг-
kazive-	pos	IPA	to spin; to whirl; to engage in a certain shamanistic rite	kazivuq ‘it spun around’ / kazivutaa ‘he spun around with it’; kaziftaa ‘he spun it’	казивы-
kazivun	pos	IPA	leather strap for lashing; sinew band holding skin on drum frame	No information given.	казивун
kazivutkagh-	pos	IPA	to be anxious and confused	No information given.	казивуткаӷ-
kegaraan	pos	IPA	"slashes, two, made through skin in crown of head of caught walrus or bearded seal for attaching a rope"	kegaraatangakun petugluku iqeghtaghput ‘after fastening a line to it (the caught sea mammal) through the slashes made in the skin of the crown of its head we tethered it to the ice’	кыгаӷāн
kegaraasigh-	pos	IPA	to make slashes through the skin at the crown of the head of a caught walrus or bearded seal to attach a rope for pulling or hoisting	kegaraasighluku iighsughnakesi ‘slash it on the head and put a rope through it and hoist it’	кыгарāсиӷ-
kegarangiq	pos	IPA	surf smelt	exact identification undetermined	кыгараңиқ
keka	pos	IPA	ouch!	"= ka, ka em; exclamatory particle; keka, aqnighqaghpenga ‘ouch, you’re hurting me’"	кыка
kelag-	pos	IPA	to unravel; to come undone	kelagtuq ‘it came undone’ / kelagtaa ‘he undid it’	кыляг-
keleg-	pos	IPA	"to alert someone of an opportunity, danger, etc.; to tell someone that it’s time to act; to invite; to alert; to inform; to startle and scare away (a wild animal)"	kelgaa ‘he went and told him that it was time’ /	кылыг-
keleghvik	pos	IPA	groove around the rim of a drum for the thong which holds on the drumskin	No information given.	кылыӷвик
kelenga-	pos	IPA	to be wary; to be on guard	kelengaaq ‘he was on guard’ / Teghikusat quunpeng kelengaghllagulghiit. ‘Animals are always on the alert.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 75)	кылыңа-
kelengake-	pos	IPA	to guard; to watch for or watch out for; to babysit	"kelengakaa ‘he guarded him’, ‘watched over him’, or ‘watched out for him’ /"	кылыңакы-
kelengakista	pos	IPA	guard; watchman; babysitter	No information given.	кылыңакиста
kelengaruugh-	pos	IPA	to watch carefully	Chukotkan (R)	кылыңарӯӷ-
kelevagh-	pos	IPA	to go back from shore or behind building; to take back from shore or behind building; to go further into the house or room	kelevaghtuq ‘he went to the back area’; kelevaghaa ‘he took it to the back area’ /	кылываӷ-
keleve-	pos	IPA	to cut into a strip (when making thong from hide)	kelevuq ‘he cut hide into a thong’; kelevaa ‘he cut it into a thong’ /	кылывы-
kelevlek	pos	IPA	male ribbon seal (Phoca fasciata)	cf. keleve-	кылывлык
kelgugh-	pos	IPA	to invite people; to inform people	No information given.	кылгуӷ-
kelguneq	pos	IPA	animal that is wary (because of being shot at or the like)	teghikusaq guuteghllagem kelgunghughsimaa ‘the animal has become wary due to being shot at a lot’; malighquqaat ayveq kipullgaghtaghllagughtuq kelgunghughtem ‘the walrus they were after kept on going the opposite direction because of its becoming wary’	кылгупық
kelgunghughte-	pos	IPA	to make or become wary (of game animal)	teghikusaq guuteghllagem kelgunghughsimaa ‘the animal became wary because there was so much shooting	кылгунӷуҳты-
kelgute-	pos	IPA	to show; to reveal	kelgutaa ‘he or it showed it’; Qaneghmiwaaghma kelgutaa puqleghama angtalanga. ‘my oral thermomether showed the extent of my fever.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 137)	кылгуты-
kelig-	pos	IPA	to scrape	keligtuq ‘he scraped something’; keligaa ‘he scraped it’ /	кылиг-
keligagh-	pos	IPA	to scrape with long easy strokes	No information given.	кылигаӷ-
keligraasiq	pos	IPA	scraper; rake	No information given.	кылигрāсиқ
keligtugh-	pos	IPA	to scrape with short hard strokes	No information given.	кылихтуӷ-
kelilleq	pos	IPA	"scrapings, especially the material scraped from the inside of a pipe and then added to tobacco"	No information given.	кылильық
kellaak	pos	IPA	clock	"used in the dual, kellaagek, for one clock; also used in Chukotka; Vuvallam yuga unanguluku pingayumi kellaagegni nekegtaqaat vuvalla. ‘At three o’clock the ceremony hosts set up the ceremony.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 47)"	кылья̄к
kelli-	pos	IPA	lustful; desiring	"emotional root; kellikaa ‘he lusts after her, desires her’; kelliyugtuq ‘he feels lust, desire’"	кыльи-
kellighinaq*	pos	IPA	open water between ice in the ocean; polynya	No information given.	кыльӷинақ
kellii	pos	IPA	sea; ocean; the ocean	"when inflecting, this word acts as the 3s-s possessed form of kelliq* (from ketliq 'the one out there'), thus with non-absolutive endings in n (rather than m):  kelliinun ‘to the ocean’ (literally, 'to its “kelliq”'); kellii isekinaghtuq ‘the ocean out there is cold’; (see also aywaa, kilgaa, and uughqa)"	кыльӣ
kellmighqe-	pos	IPA	to verify; to find out more	"ungipaq nagaquqiinaghyamigu ellmineng angyakun piighaghsimalghii, talwa legan kellmighqegpenaki kinkungutangi ungipat pillghitni angyat aviilnguut ‘as soon as he heard the news he immediately went out with his boat to check and see whether a boat really was missing’; Taakut Tzaarankunguut entaqun aghnam aatgha, weni kellmighqepallghitunga. ‘They were “Tsar” and family, probably the woman’s name, but I really didn’t look into it any further.’ (SIVUQAM. NANGAGH. 2:50)"	кыльмьиҳқы-
kellngugh-	pos	IPA	to be in the (recent) past; to be finished; to be over	"sariiq kellnguqagu wetku aghvigillequnga ‘when the activities are over, only then will I wash some clothes’"	кыльңуӷ-
kelqe-	pos	IPA	to bring along	kelquq ‘he brought something along’; kelqaa ‘he brought it along’ / Nulughyaghtunga suflugaqa kelqelluku. ‘I went fishing and brought along my rifle.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 76)	кыльқы-
"kelu, keluta"	pos	IPA	area behind building; area back from shore; back area of room or house opposite the entrance	"kelunga or kelutanga ‘the area behind it or back from it, its back area’; kelutangani ‘behind it, on the side of it away from the shore, in the back of it’; kelutmun ‘towards the area behind town’; opposite of keta"	"кылю, кылюта"
kelugilnguq*	pos	IPA	thin stitch	Chukotkan (R)	кылугилңуқ
Kelugnaan Naayvaa	pos	IPA	Kiloknak Lagoon at east end of St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Кылюгнāн Нāӥвā
keluk	pos	IPA	stitch	No information given.	кылюк
kelulghun	pos	IPA	rope attached to the foundation of a winter house	Chukotkan (R)	кылюлӷун
kelulighaq	pos	IPA	"beam in the frame of the aagra, the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	Chukotkan (R)	кылюлиӷақ
kelusiqaq	pos	IPA	dry walrus skin which is used to cover the summer house	Chukotkan (R)	кылюсиқақ
keluvagh-	pos	IPA	go to the back 	No information given.	кылюваӷ-
keluvaq	pos	IPA	area far to the back 	keluvani ‘in the area way back’	кылювақ
kelwaya	pos	IPA	traditional Chukchi ceremony	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	кылӱая
kemagluk	pos	IPA	sea vegetable	"grey in color, bitter and salty in taste; exact identification undetermined"	кымаглюк
kemagnaq	pos	IPA	lung	Aghallegtam nagatusignekun nagatii kemagnanka. ‘The doctor listened to my lungs with a stethoscope.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 107); kemagnam sefluwaaghi ‘bronchial tubes’	кымагнақ
kemeghqegkaq	pos	IPA	"dish of cooked, boned, and flaked salmn meat mixed with whipped sea mammal oil (and optionally berries)"	No information given.	кымыҳқыхкақ
kemegmik	pos	IPA	underwear	No information given.	кымыгмик
kemegtungiq	pos	IPA	shrimp or shrimp-like creature	cf. kemek	кымыхтуңиқ
kemek	pos	IPA	flesh; skin; relative(s) (one’s own “flesh and blood”)	No information given.	кымык
kemekrak	pos	IPA	meat; piece of meat; relative; kin	gaaghaa neghsam kemekraga ‘he cooked the seals meat’	кымыкшак
kemengquk	pos	IPA	male underwear	Chukotkan (R)	кымыңқук
kemgenu	pos	IPA	string of beads	Chukotkan (R)	кымгыну
kemgite-	pos	IPA	to be skinny	No information given.	кымгиты-
kemk-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kemkelleghaq, kemkiili-; = kumk-"	кымк-
kemkeghnak	pos	IPA	"tiny pinkish-orange sea vegetable, sometimes called ""sea carrot"""	exact identification undetermined	кымкыӷнак
kemkelleghaq	pos	IPA	food particle between teeth	No information given.	кымкыльыӷақ
kemkemae	pos	IPA	food made of reindeer tallow and meat	Chukotkan (R)	кымкымаы
kemkiili-	pos	IPA	to pick one's teeth; remove food particle from between teeth	kemkiiliiq ‘he is picking his teeth’ /= kumkiili-	кымкӣли-
kemkiilin	pos	IPA	toothpick	#NAME?	кымкӣлин
kemkiilisiq	pos	IPA	toothpick	#NAME?	кымкӣлисиқ
kemnagh-	pos	IPA	to be capacious; to be spacious; to hold a lot	kemnaghtuq ‘it holds a lot’ /	кымнаӷ-
ken’gughaasiq	pos	IPA	chisel	"ken’gughaasimeng peqiglluku taqmiighaa ‘he used the chisel and finished his work’; qamislimi ken’gughaasit atupiwaaqut ‘when making a sled, chisels are very useful’"	кынгуӷāсиқ
keneghmig-	pos	IPA	to place in gathered front of garment	Chukotkan (R); cf. keniq	кыныӷмиг-
kenegte-	pos	IPA	to press	kenegtaa ‘he pressed on it’ / kenegtiiq ‘he pressed something; ken’gutaa ‘he pressed it onto something’	кыныхты-
kenelghutak	pos	IPA	lamp (kerosene burning or the like)	No information given.	кынылӷутак
"keneligh-, kenigh-1"	pos	IPA	"to shine a light on (it), put a light in (it)"	No information given.	"кынылиӷ-, кыниӷ-1"
keneq	pos	IPA	fire; electric light; electricity	"also used in the dual, kenghek, for one fire or light; used in the plural, kenghet, for electricity; ighivgaatanga tamaghhaan kenghek kumaghllukek uzimun nekevuulluta ungipaghaataqukut ‘each night we build a fire and stand around telling stories’"	кынық
keneqetaaghek	pos	IPA	"lamp, lantern"	No information given.	кынықытāӷык
kenghhwaataq	pos	IPA	light for the outer room (as of a traditional style house)	"kenghhwaataq kumaghhnakesi mamlegfagilgan ‘turn on the outer room light before it gets dark’; kenghhwaatat nanistun peqalget uqulget angqaperuget mekestaaghhaat nanineng ‘lights for the outer room have wicks and oil blubber like the seal oil lamp and are round, but smaller than the usual seal oil lamp’"	кынҳӱāтақ
kenghhwaq	pos	IPA	ceremonial oil lamp; ceremonial fire	"used in the dual, kenghhwak, for one such ceremonial lamp or fire; Apeghiighyami kenghhwak kumaghllukek, sasiqumtaaghat ayumiq kenghhwighluteng neqa kenghhwam uvitanganun llilaghtughllagaqluku. ‘When he kindled a ceremonial fire; it was their age-old custom to build a ceremonial fire and place food around the fire.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:256)"	кынҳӱақ
kenghwaaq	pos	IPA	night lamp	No information given.	кынӷӱāқ
kenigh-2	pos	IPA	to point at	kenighaa ‘he pointed at it’ /	кыниӷ-2
kenileq	pos	IPA	"passage, cleared of shore ice, for boats to go out to sea; boat path or launching place (on sea ice)"	"also plural, kenilghet, used for one passage; Taagken angyaq angyilghaneng ateghlluku, taakutlu neqet qaakluki angyamun, kanavek kenileghnun angyaq atghaataqaat. ‘Then after taking the boat down from the boat rack, they put those [ceremonial] food in the boat, and took the boat down to the launching place.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:206)"	кынилық
keniliigh-	pos	IPA	to clear a passage for boats	No information given.	кынилӣӷ-
keniq	pos	IPA	skirt of parka or dress	cf. keneghmig-	кыниқ
keniqaan	pos	IPA	"knob (originally ivory, now also metal) on shaft of harpon to which line from harpoon head is attached; cervical vertebra"	No information given.	кыниқāн
keniqagh-	pos	IPA	to point with the middle finger from anger	"ugumiyagulluku sameng pigpenaan keniqaghluku unisimakanga ‘he became angry at him, so he pointed at him with his middle finger with out saying anything and left him’"	кыниқаӷ-
kenite-	pos	IPA	to soak; to soak a skin preparatory to stretching it onto a boat frame	kenitaa ‘he is soaking it’ /	кыниты-
kenlae	pos	IPA	end; source; reason behind something; boundary; limit; edge	kenlelighaa ‘he put a limit to it’	кынляы
kenlanga	pos	IPA	"continuing from then, or until then"	"particle; Taagken kenlanga meteghlluk tagneghtaa, teghla aqaleghyagughtaa. ‘Continuing from that point on the raven has been black and the owl variegated.’ (AANGHHAQ 28); Drum-a tamaana ullghitaghtaghluku atghaataqaat kenlanga naangellghanun. ‘They would roll the drums back until they were all finished.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:52); Taagken kenlanga yuggaq unangyiitkuvinghaaq unangyughqaamakanga. ‘Then so, from then on, the man who was once an unsuccessful hunter, was now a very successful hunter.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 119); Apeghnaqaqa ungipaghaq kenlanga naangwaaghtestellghanun kaalluku. ‘I will tell the story until I reach the very end.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 77)"	кынляңа
kenle-	pos	IPA	to get to the heart of the matter	kenlaapestaghhaaneng ‘from the very start’; cf. kenla	кынлы-
Kenleghaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	in Chukotka	Кынлыӷаӷмӣ(т)
Kenleghaq	pos	IPA	village site east of Sireniki (Sighinek) in Chukotka	see Map 1 in Appendices	Кынлыӷақ
kenlengnaqe-	pos	IPA	to ask; to make inquiries about; to try to understand or find out	No information given.	кынлыңнақы-
kenlughmun	pos	IPA	instead; in the least expected way or place; by the least expected person; in a contrary or opposite way	particle; kenlughmun uyughaan liisimakeftaa ‘his younger brother knew it instead of him’; kenlughmun angelleghtani uteghmun apeghtughii ‘instead he taught someone older than he was (where it was supposed to be the older teaching the younger)’; kenlughmun ‘(going) the opposite way; (acting) to the contrary’	кынлуӷмун
kenluq*	pos	IPA	opposite; contrary; least expected thing	No information given.	кынлюқ
kenluqsagneq	pos	IPA	one who is stingy; one who limits his actions excessively; one who hesitates; one who is overly cautious	yuggaq taana kenluqsagnepiguuq ‘that man is too cautious or is too stingy’; sariighmun kenluqsagniqaquq awen ‘he often hesitates to join in when there is some activity taking place’	кынлуқсагнық
kenmaangqaq	pos	IPA	water behind shore line caused by high waves flooding area; lagoon	No information given.	кынмāңқақ
kenmawae	pos	IPA	"transverse narrow strip of wood in frame of the aagra, insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	Chukotkan (R)	кынмаӱаы
kennaqe-	pos	IPA	to be going to or intending to set out in a boat from the shore; to put out to sea	angyat kennaqut ‘the boat is about to leave’; Kennaqinaamaamta elalluugtaa. ‘Before we left with the boat the weather got bad.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 48)	кыньақы-
kennataq	pos	IPA	"small lamp/stove used in outer room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	кыньатақ
kennigh-	pos	IPA	to remove an extra oil-lamp; to put away the oil-lamp for the seance of the shaman	Chukotkan (R)	кыньиӷ-
kenqignagh-	pos	IPA	to be a disciplined person; to be modest	Chukotkan (V&E)	кынқигнаӷ-
Kentanga	pos	IPA	Kintanga Bay (and Pt.) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Кынтаңа
kentate-	pos	IPA	to be successful	Chukotkan	кынтаты-
Kentuqaq	pos	IPA	south peak of the mountain behind Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Кынтуқақ
kenu-	pos	IPA	to poke; to push into with a pointed instrument; to bore; to test ice	kenaa ‘he poked it’ / kenugu savigmeng ‘poke it with the knife point!’	кыну-
kenugilgnuq*	pos	IPA	round needle.	No information given.	кынугилгнуқ
kenugragh-	pos	IPA	to press with knuckles	No information given.	кынуграӷ-
kenuk	pos	IPA	edge; ridge	No information given.	кынук
kenuketaq	pos	IPA	"plug; stopper used for sealskin pokes, floats, holes in a boat, etc."	#NAME?	кынукытақ
kenukutaq	pos	IPA	"plug; stopper used for sealskin pokes, floats, holes in a boat, etc."	#NAME?	кынукутақ
kenulek1	pos	IPA	three-cornered skin-sewing needle	No information given.	кынулык1
kenulek2	pos	IPA	type of codfish	Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined; = qenulek	кынулык2
kenuqagh-	pos	IPA	to stab	No information given.	кынуқаӷ-
kenuregh-	pos	IPA	to poke hard with the finger	No information given.	кынурыӷ-
kenuugte-	pos	IPA	to develop points (of clouds)	qilaga kenuugtaa ‘the sky is getting elongated pointed clouds (as before a storm)’	кынӯхты-
kepe-	pos	IPA	to cut off; to cut in half across the short dimension; to sever; to discontinue	"kepuq ‘it got cut, severed’; kepaa ‘he cut it, severed it’ / kepumaaq ‘it has been cut, severed’; kepneq’ a cut-off piece’; kepigalnguq something ‘that cannot be cut, severed’"	кыпы-
kepelleq	pos	IPA	tub	"used in the dual, kepellghek, for one tub"	кыпыльық
kepkagh-	pos	IPA	to snap in two; to break in two	kepkaghaghsaghtuq ‘it is about to snap’	кыпкаӷ-
Kepkaghyalqak	pos	IPA	site on Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Кыпкаӷяльқак
kepliigh-	pos	IPA	to cut bangs	kepliightuq ‘he cut his (own) bangs’; kepliighaa ‘he cut her bangs’ /	кыпльӣӷ-
kepliiq	pos	IPA	bangs of hair	"used in the plural, kepliighet"	кыпльӣқ
kepsiigalnguq*	pos	IPA	shrimp type (small)	No information given.	кыпсӣгалңуқ
kepsiiqu-	pos	IPA	to lend a hand; to be helpful; to help out	aghnaghaam aghayuqagni kepsiiqwaak neghelghiik ‘the girl helped out her parents when they were eating’; ighsaningilnguum ilani kepsiiqwaaqii ‘a person who is not lazy helps others’; apelqat kepsiiqwaaghteki ‘please help the guests’	кыпсӣқу-
kepsugh-	pos	IPA	to have a full stomach; to be satiated; to have enough	kepsughtuq ‘he is full’ or ‘he is satiated’ / neqa kepsughnaghtuq ‘the food is filling’; kepsughsiin? ‘are you full?’; kepsughtunga ‘I am full’; Kepsughpenaamta ilagameng taaqukut. ‘We quit singing before we were satiated.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 78)	кыпсюӷ-
kepugh-	pos	IPA	to cut up completely; to cut short; to cut hair (in appropriate context)	aghnam panini kepughaa ‘the woman cut her daughter’s hair’	кыпуӷ-
kepusiq	pos	IPA	rotary electric saw; “skilsaw”	"used in the dual, kepusik, for one saw"	кыпусиқ
kerek	pos	IPA	come! (to call puppy)	particle; articulated repeatedly to call a puppy	кырык
kergam	pos	IPA	no sooner than; ready to act	"particle; Angayuqanka nallukanka, anglegutenka.  Kergam taghnughhaalunga iflalaghasimalghiit. ‘I didn’t know my parents or siblings. I was no more than a child when they died.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:106)"	кыргам
kergamqun	pos	IPA	just when	particle	кыргамқун
keskesaagh-	pos	IPA	"to shoo away a puppy using the expression ""kes-kes""."	No information given.	кыскыся̄ӷ-
kesnaghte-	pos	IPA	to ask for the fulfilment of a promise; to remind	kesnaghtaa ‘he reminded him’ /	кысньаҳты-
keste-	pos	IPA	to count	"kestaa ‘he counted it’ (and kestii ‘he counted them’) / kestiiq ‘he counted something’; Kayutanka kesaqenka akimigaaftut. ‘When I counted the fish I caught, there were fifteen.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 78)"	кысты-
kestisiq	pos	IPA	the act or art of counting; number; numeral	"Igameng, kestisimeng apeghtughaqegkangit. ‘They taught them writing and counting (or the letters and the numbers).’ (SIVUQ. UNGIP. 2)"	кыстисиқ
kestusiq	pos	IPA	numeral; number	No information given.	кыстусиқ
kesutke-	pos	IPA	to count somebody or something in; to add	kesutkellunga whangallu nengighqennakesi ‘count me in and divide them up’; kestikumta kesutkelleqaghput ‘we will count him in when we count them’	кысуткы-
ketaatkin	pos	IPA	but unfortunately	particle; Chukotkan	кытāткин
ketae	pos	IPA	"area in front; area towards water (ocean); entrance to the aagra, the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	ketngani or ketangani ‘in front of it’; opposite of kelu; cf. kellii	кытаы
ketamsaswha	pos	IPA	at once; suddenly; unexpectedly; in a little while with determination	particle; Chukotkan	кытамсясӱьа
ketanqu-	pos	IPA	to run	"ketanquuq ‘he ran’ / ketanqutaa ‘he ran off with it’; Naayvam kenlenganeng ketanquperiwaaghmeng tagiinga. ‘I came running all the way from the end of the lake.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 78); Ketanqwaaghaghaquq, araghataghaquq, ivaghaqaa naani. ‘She ran around screaming, looking for her mother.’ (YUP. ULUNG. 2:86)"	кытанқу-
ketanqusnaq	pos	IPA	running fast	"adverbial particle; Alinguq, uuvganeng araamaghmi ketanqusnaq qimagtuq. ‘She was frightened and from that moment screaming she fled running fast.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:208)"	кытанқусньақ
kete-	pos	IPA	to launch a boat; to go out to sea	"ketuq ‘he launched, he or it (boat) went out to sea’ / kennaquq ‘he’s ready to launch, he's putting out to sea’; ketutaat ‘they launched it, they took it out to sea’; this is the verbal counterpart of ketae"	кыты-
ketfagh-	pos	IPA	to go far out to sea; to come out to an open place in full view	ketfaamakanga ‘she brought it out’ 	кытфаӷ-
ketfaghte-	pos	IPA	to recollect	No information given.	кытфаҳты-
ketligh-	pos	IPA	to betray	Chukotkan (R)	кытльиӷ-
ketliq	pos	IPA	neighbor living toward the south; one sitting nearer to exit	Chukotkan (R)	кытльи́қ
Ketliqaq	pos	IPA	Kookoolik Cape on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Кытльиқақ
ketmiighte-	pos	IPA	to go down along the river; to swim out from shore to sea	Chukotkan (R)	кытмӣҳты-
ketmun	pos	IPA	out to sea; outwards; toward water; toward exit; away from shore (into the sea)	No information given.	кытмьун
ketngig-	pos	IPA	to kick (especially with the bottom of one's heel)	No information given.	кытңиг-
ketngigpalluq	pos	IPA	high-heeled shoe	No information given.	кытңихпальюқ
ketngiitet	pos	IPA	Achilles tendon	No information given.	кытңӣтыт
ketngik	pos	IPA	heel	No information given.	кытңик
Ketngipalak	pos	IPA	mouth of Kitnepaluk Cr. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Кытңьипаляк
ketsighaq	pos	IPA	"pole holding the reindeer hide curtain of the aagra, the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	No information given.	кытсиӷақ
ketwhelqun	pos	IPA	still; finally	"particle; a comment on change or continuance; ketwhelqun sugagpenani nuqetuq qasiigalkangat ‘he still didn’t get angry even if they were giving him a hard time’; umegneghughtaa ketwhelqun muluulghii aliineghluk ‘it finally got stormy after a long period of good weather’; … qaya paamna nenglulighvigilnguq tangeghtughllak. Ketwhelqun, Uygunani kana allameng taana Kangkiilghem asinganiqun, taghnughhaghhiit estungigatut. ‘… the hillside it was too hard for making underground houses. On the other hand you know, at Uygunat, down there below Kangkiileq, (it was so steep that it’s a wonder that) children didn't slide off them.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:18)"	кытӱыльқун
kevaawagh-	pos	IPA	to raise; to elevate; to place higher	"aliighaqaa qilaga kevaawaghtaa ‘it is clearing up, the skies are lifting up’; qilaglluk kevaawaghsaqminigu sukalluni alighaa ‘when the storm clouds lifted up, it quickly cleared up’"	кывāӱаӷ-
kevaghqu-	pos	IPA	to lift a bit to check the weight of something	kevaghquuq ‘he lifted something to check its weight’; kevaghqwaa ‘he lifted it to check its weight’ /	кываҳқу-
keveg-	pos	IPA	to lift	kevegtuq (or kevgiiq) ‘he lifted something’; kevgaa ‘he lifted it’ /	кывыг-
kevgaagh-	pos	IPA	to hold and carry after lifting	as when holding a baby	кывгāӷ-
kevgaasluk	pos	IPA	errand runner	uyughateng anglegutangita kevgaaslugat ‘they let their younger brother run around doing errands all the time’; kevgaasluguneghmeng qinuyagutaquq ‘he is getting sick and tired of going around on errands all the time’	кывгāсльюк
kevgaayugneq	pos	IPA	obliging person	No information given.	кывгāюгнық
kevigh-	pos	IPA	"to stuff; to plug; to load (a gun); to fill (a hole, crack, etc.)"	"kevighaa ‘he stuffed it, plugged it, loaded it’ / kevighiiq or keviituq ‘he stuffed something’"	кывиӷ-
kevighqaq	pos	IPA	part of large intestine of reindeer; container filled with meat for eating later; down-filled comforter	No information given.	кывиҳқақ
keviin	pos	IPA	moss insulation	No information given.	кывӣн
keviiq	pos	IPA	home-made reindeer sausage	Chukotkan (R)	кывӣқ
keviiti-	pos	IPA	to prepare meat for storage by putting it in containers	No information given.	кывӣти-
Kevipak	pos	IPA	Kiveepuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Кывипак
keviq	pos	IPA	container made from part of large intestine of reindeer	apparently a direct nominalization of kevigh-	кывиқ
keviqaataq	pos	IPA	meat stored by being stuffed in a skin sack	No information given.	кывиқāтақ
kevyunagh-	pos	IPA	to be unappetizing (of food)	No information given.	кывьюнаӷ-
"kewaayae, kewaayi"	pos	IPA	special dish or meal for ceremony; tasty food	No information given.	"кыӱāяы, кыӱāӥи"
kewaayi-	pos	IPA	to take and eat only a certain food over and over	No information given.	кыӱāӥи-
Keyuuget	pos	IPA	Tomname Lagoon (or the sandspit defining it) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Кыю̄гыт
kezeghhagh-	pos	IPA	only; alone; by oneself	used in the quantifier/qualifier construction; kezeghhaghmi ‘by himself’; cf. kezemaghhagh-	кызыҳаӷ-
kezemaghhagh-	pos	IPA	only; alone; by oneself	used in the quantifier/qualifier construction; Elngaatall puvallanghani yaywaalilek tamaa elngaatall ellnginaghhaghmeng kezemaghhaghmeng. ‘Whenever the ceremony occured they had an orphan and he lived very much alone.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:170); cf. kezeghhaq*	кызымаҳаӷ-
kezemaq	pos	IPA	only child; person who is alone (especially one alone in the wilderness)	No information given.	кызымақ
kezemtaq	pos	IPA	animal that is alone	No information given.	кызымтақ
kezingughte-	pos	IPA	to gather; to save	kezingughtiiqughnguq uqumeng neqesghaghqameng ‘he is saving blubber for fox bait’; quumqiighmeng kezingughti ‘gather some wood’	кызиңуҳты-
Kigalighaq	pos	IPA	Kialegak	old village site on Southeast Cape of St. Lawrence Island; = Kiyalighaq (see listing there for more details); see Map 6 in Appendices	Кигалиӷақ
kighaq	pos	IPA	double layered ice	No information given.	киӷақ
kii1	pos	IPA	wound	kiingi ‘his wounds’; cf. kiligh-	кӣ1
kii2	pos	IPA	gee!; oh!	"exclamatory particle; Unallu pinighyalghii iigna igaghvik una ukaliq naafqellghem kenlenga taana, pinighllagyalghii. Kii tawani aqfaquuteghllagaqsalghiit. Ilulighneghitgun whangkuta mekestaaghhaghni. ‘This too was good, the school over there, the one on this side, at the end of the ruins, it used to be good. Gee, they used to run there a whole lot. We small ones would participate inside of them.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:16); Mekestaaghhaaluta ighivgaghmillu nulughyaatet taglanghata kayuliiragkiineghmeggni kii puyughllugllawaaquq. ‘When we were small, in school too, when the fisherman came in, they would cook sculpins, and oh, it would become very sooty.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:82); Tawaten ataasimi aghneghmi Kiiluuq aaghhneghlliqumalghii  esnamun samavek elqwaaghyaghnaluni. … Kii, qagighllaguftughnguq. ‘One day Kiiluuq being stubborn like that went to the shore down there to gather seaweed. Gee, the waves were big, so it is said.’ (KIILUUQ 3)"	кӣ2
kiig-	pos	IPA	to be summer	"see also kiik; kiigu; Pugughileghmiitlu taakut avelghiigalnguut kiigutanga kiyang tamaghhaan, …. ‘Those Southwest Cape people never missed the opportunity everytime when it was summer, ….’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140)"	кӣг-
Kiigem Aghnaa	pos	IPA	May	"literally, 'the woman (mother) of summer'; also given in various sources as April-May, and May-June"	Кӣгым Аӷнā
Kiigem Qukaa	pos	IPA	August	"literally, 'the middle of summer'; also given in one source as July-August"	Кӣгым Қукā
kiighaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to feel feverish; to have chills (from fever or fear)	kiighaghtaghtuq ‘he feels feverish or chilled’ /	кӣӷаҳтаӷ-
kiighmik	pos	IPA	middle layer (especially of clothes)	No information given.	кӣӷмик
kiighragtagh-	pos	IPA	to get by as best one can despite lack of knowledge	No information given.	кӣӷрахтаӷ-
kiighte-	pos	IPA	to split (hide or fish); to slice; to separate something into parts leaving them connected on the side (as when slicing a hot dog bun)	kiightaa ‘he split it’ / kiightiiq ‘he split something’; Naama tanpeghek kiightaak ulaaghmeng. ‘My mother split the walrus hide with a semi-lunar knife.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 167)	кӣҳты-
kiighutraq	pos	IPA	layer of something	Chukotkan (R)	кӣӷутшақ
kiighwyaq	pos	IPA	aurora; northern lights	Ighivgaq kiighwyaghllaguuq elngaatall. ‘The aurora was really active last night.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 79)	кӣӱӷьяқ
kiigtaq	pos	IPA	thing of last summer	kiigtaaguq ‘it is from last summer’	кӣхтақ
kiigumigh-	pos	IPA	for there to be a heat wave during winter melting snow and ice	nani tawani uksumi kiigumighaqngami repall kiiwet pinaghluteng pikat ‘one year there was a heat wave during winter and the rivers broke up and flowed’	кӣгумиӷ-
kiik	pos	IPA	summer; last summer	"kiilqusiq ‘all summer’; kiigtaq ‘something from last summer’; kiik as a particle, ‘last summer’; see also kiig-"	кӣк
kiikun	pos	IPA	next summer	particle	кӣкун
kiikw	pos	IPA	river	"usually dual, kiiwek, for one river, kiiwhaak (a dual) ‘stream or creek’; Qatelghiim kiiwek kaallukek akimun ayuqelghiik maligsimakek iwerngam esnamun. ‘The fox got to the river and followed it to the ocean.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 156); Kiiwegnun kaalluni qaltani imiimakangi. ‘After getting to a river she filled her buckets.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 44); note however uses in the grammatical singular (used for a general plural) such as, Tengaaguq enngaatall sama esghapagumaan qulanganeng, uyghagaq, kiikw, naayvaq yuvghiighteghaa. ‘It flew around looking down from above examining the rocks, the rivers, and the lakes.’ (SIVUQ. UNGIPAGH. II:104); but also sometimes as a true singular: Piyuneghmininguq kiiwem esnengakun tagiiqelghii. ‘She said that when she used to go for a walk she’d come back along the bank of that river.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:234)"	кӣкӱ
kiilaa-	pos	IPA	to die from a cut or wound (without being taken)(of game animal)	"kiilaallequq ayveq malighquqaat, unakughluku ifliimakangat ‘the walrus they are chasing might die from its wound; they struck it but lost it’"	кӣлā-
kiilqusiq	pos	IPA	all summer	No information given.	кӣльқусиқ
kiimllugte-	pos	IPA	to get dim	kiimllugtuq or kiimllugtaa ‘it got dim’; kiimllugngaaq ‘it is dim’; kiimllugtestaa ‘he made it dim’	кӣмльюхты-
kiimsigh-	pos	IPA	to reply; to answer	"Meteghllugem kiimsighaa, ""Aa-ha-ha-haa, sangantuq-aa atkugllaka aallaataghsigu? ‘Raven answered him, “Ha, ha, ha, why did you put on my big parka?’ (Sivuq. Nangagh. 3:234); Sumeghmeggni akuzilleghllagmegteggun kiimsighlleqniluki yughalleteng piiqiit. ‘In their way of thinking they maintain that through their many and loud words He will answer their prayers.’ (Matthew 6.7)"	кӣмсиӷ-
kiingighte-	pos	IPA	to thaw out food	"maklagmeng kiingighsighaqukut kumlataghnaluta ‘we are thawing out bearded seal meat so that we can eat it partly frozen’; kiingighsighaq entaqun kingightaa, aavgughyaghqaaghtuq ‘maybe the meat is thawed up enough, it is ready to be cut up’; cf. kiik"	кӣңиҳты-
kiingngwaag- 	pos	IPA	to tag (in play)	kiingngwaagaa ‘he tagged her’; kiingngwaagutut ‘they played tag’	кӣңьӱāг-
kiingngwaak	pos	IPA	game of tag	Teghigniqutukut kiingngwaagmeng. ‘We had a lot of fun playing tag.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 159)	кӣңьӱāк
kiipeklak	pos	IPA	freckle	kiipeklagtuuq ‘he has lots of freckles’	кӣпыкльяк
kiiq	pos	IPA	space between things; interstices	kiighit ‘the spaces between them’	кӣқ
kiiste-	pos	IPA	to make red-hot; to burn	Chukotkan (R); naniq kiistekaq ‘red-hot seal-oil lamp’	кӣсты-
Kiitek	pos	IPA	Koozata River on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Кӣтык
kiitigh-	pos	IPA	to get a cut or wound	Iqulunga kiitightunga saghumignemkun inemkun. ‘I fell down and got a cut in my left iliac area.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 64)	кӣтыӷ-
kiitmik	pos	IPA	low-bush cranberry (Vaccinium vitus-idaea)	No information given.	кӣтмьик
kiive-	pos	IPA	"to settle (food in stomach, child after crying, tub draining, sediment sinking, etc.); to abate"	kiivuq ‘it settled’ / qefliqelleghllaga kiiveghraagtuq ‘his fury is abating’; esleqelleghllaka kiivuq ‘my overly full feeling (in my stomach) is going away’; mesiilghutam pagulakek kiivesighlukek  kuuvaak ‘he waited for the resiue to settle on the bottom of the oil can and he poured the oil out’	кӣвы-
kiivneq	pos	IPA	sediment	kiivnegha siipluku allakaan egtaa ‘he separated out the sediment and threw it out’; melghutak kiivnengeghhlagumalghiik ‘the water jug has a lot of sediment in the bottom’	кӣвнық
kiivnigh-	pos	IPA	for there to be slush snow in the sea water impeding boat travel	"ellmaaragmi qanigllugughhneghminigu meq kiivnighllagughtaquq ‘when the wind is calm and it gets really snowy, snow builds up in the ocean’"	кӣвниӷ-
kiivnin	pos	IPA	slush snow in sea water impeding boat travel and sometimes sinking  below the surface or even to the shallow bottom near the shore 	see item 29 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	кӣвнин
Kiiwaaghek	pos	IPA	"Kewagek Cr. on St. Lawrence Is., emptying into Niyrakpak Lagoon"	see Map 4 in Appendices	Кӣӱāӷык
kiiwek	pos	IPA	river	"see kiikw, of which this is the dual which is used for a single river"	кӣӱык
kiiwhtaq	pos	IPA	dolly varden trout (Salvelinus malma)	No information given.	кӣӱхтақ
kiiwna	pos	IPA	that one further in; that one toward the northeast; that one toward Savoonga from Gambell; one at far end	"base: kiw-; restricted demonstrative pronoun; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: kiiwhkut ‘those in there’; vocative: kiiwyuq ‘you, in there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: teskiwna or eskiwna ‘that one in there’; localis adverb: kiwani ‘in there’; terminalis adverb: kiwavek ‘to in there’; vialis adverb: kiiggun or kiiwhun ‘through in there’; ablative adverb: kiiwhken ‘from in there’; interjectonal: kiwa ‘there (in there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: teskiwani or eskiwani ‘there, in there’; kiwatmun ‘toward the northeast east’ or ‘further in’"	кӣӱна
kiiyeghwaq	pos	IPA	brook; stream	No information given.	кӣӥыӷӱақ
kiksag-	pos	IPA	to anchor with a spike or similar thing	"qikmiq taghaghmeng uyaatalek, aghnaghaam nuqneqanga angalkesan nunakun nekregmeng kiksagaa ‘the girl was holding a dog on a leash and when it tried to get away she anchored to the ground with a cargo hook’"	киксяг-
kiksak	pos	IPA	ice creeper	cf. iksaak; worn on sole of boot to prevent slipping	киксяк
kilgaa	pos	IPA	tundra; wilderness; uninhabited area; the wilderness	"when inflecting, this word acts as the 3s-s possessed form of  kilgaq*, thus with non-absolutive endings in n (rather than m): kilgaan aghnaa 'woman of the wilds' (literally, 'woman of its “kilgaq”'); kilgaanun ‘to the wilderness’; (see also aywaa, kellii, and uughqa)"	килгā
kilgaamiqe-	pos	IPA	to become a person living wild in the wilderness	"especially of a small child who, according to stories, becomes lost in the wilderness and lives wild there"	килгāмиқы-
kilgaanigh-	pos	IPA	to become detached	ighunga ayemluni kilgaanighwaaghumalghii ‘its leg snapped and it is completely detatched’; sayughqusiq kilgaaniimalghii ‘the starter cord became detatched’	килгāниӷ-
kilgaantaq	pos	IPA	small islands that are far from mainland	Taatgem kilgaantaani manigtukut ‘we gathered eggs at the small islands near Tatek’; tekeghaq taawa kilgaantalguftuq ‘there is an island right off the point’	килгāнтақ
kilgaantaq	pos	IPA	small island a little ways offshore	No information given.	килгāтақ
kilgaaqu-	pos	IPA	to run a long distance	No information given.	килгāқу-
kiligh-	pos	IPA	to cut; to get cut; to wound	especially on the hand or wrist; kilightuq ‘he cut himself or got cut’; kilighaa ‘he cut her or it (body part)’ / kilightunga iiggemkun ‘I cut my hand’; kililleq ‘a wound’ I ‘the act of getting cut’; cf. kii	килиӷ-
kiliq	pos	IPA	wound; cut	direct nominalization of kiligh-	килиқ
kimaawi-	pos	IPA	to be delayed; to act too slowly (as because of factors beyond one's control); to take too long	"kimaawiiq ‘he is taking too long’ / kimaawistaa  ‘he or it is delaying her, slowing her down’"	кимāӱи-
kimaawinaq	pos	IPA	something that delays one)	No information given.	кимāӱинақ
Kimaawitem Naayvaa	pos	IPA	Niyrakpak (Naayvaghpak) Lake (smaller lake just east along coast from ~ on St. Lawrence Is.)	see Map 4 in Appendices	Кимāӱитым Нāӥвā
kina	pos	IPA	who? (singular); someone (when used in a non-interrogative context);	"pronoun; kinkut ‘whopl?’; kinkuk ‘who2?’; kitum ‘who?’ (relative singular); kitumun ‘to whom?’ (terminalis singular); kina alngunak ‘anyone at random, whoever, whosoever’; kina alla alngunak ‘anyone else’; kinganguzin? ‘who are you?’; kinkungutsi? ‘who are youpl?’; with 3rd person endings the expanded verbal bases kinangaa- (underlyingly kinangau-) and kinkungaa- (underlyingly kinangau-) are used rather than *kinangu- and *kinkungu-; thus: kinangaawa? who is it?; kinkungaawat? who are they?"	кина
kinegh-	pos	IPA	to dry	"kineghtuq or kiinghaagaa ‘it dried’ / kineghtaa ‘it (heat, sun) dried it’; kinengllaghaa ‘he dried it (hung it up to dry, put it in a clothes dryer, etc.)’; kiinghumaaq ‘it is dry’"	киныӷ-
kineghtaq	pos	IPA	dried meat; dried fish	No information given.	киныҳтақ
kinengyugnaghqe-	pos	IPA	to place clothing or other things where they can dry	"kaamgek qulqesaallukek kinengyugnaghqaak ‘she placed the skin boots in an elevated area so they can dry easily’; aatkat saaghqughluki kinengyugnaghqiit, kineragkiighesqelluki ‘she spread the clothes so that they could dry up fast’"	киныңьюгнаҳқы-
kingi-1	pos	IPA	to act babyishly (of a child whose mother is expecting)	cf. kingu; behavior observed in small children	киңи-1
kingi-2	pos	IPA	to have part of a sea mammal carcass eaten by maggots	cf. kingu	киңи-2
kingin	pos	IPA	youngest child	No information given.	киңин
kingu	pos	IPA	rear; back; time after	"opposite of sivu; kingunga ‘its rear, behind it’; kingungani ‘after it’"	киңу
kinguk	pos	IPA	worm; maggot; “sand mason”; krill	Qateghyiighaat kingugmeng neghegkayuget. ‘Little birds eat worms.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 80)	киңук
kingulighpigaq	pos	IPA	the very last one	No information given.	киңулиҳпигақ
kinguliighaq	pos	IPA	younger generation	No information given.	киңулӣӷақ
kingulilek	pos	IPA	hind leg of quadruped	No information given.	киңулилык
kinguliq*	pos	IPA	descendant	No information given.	киңулиқ
kingumegta	pos	IPA	last whale migrating in a particular season	No information given.	киңумыхта
kingumegte-	pos	IPA	to be the last group of whales traveling in the season	uupenghami nani naasaghami kingumeggniiqaat ‘they estimated when the last group of whales  would pass in the spring’; aangepaaghrugpaghqunguniiqaat kingumegneghmini ‘they say the last group of whales are usually really big ones’	киңумыхты-
kingumun	pos	IPA	in the future; from now on	Chukotkan (R); particle	киңумун
kinguneq	pos	IPA	descendant	No information given.	киңунық
kingupak	pos	IPA	tube of “sand mason” (a type of worm)	exact identification undetermined	киңупак
kingute-	pos	IPA	to be late	kingutaa ‘he is late’ (impersonal subject) / kingutaanga ‘I am late’	киңуты-
kinguvaghhaaneng	pos	IPA	unexpectedly	"particle; specifically, when something is done by one whom you had least expected to do it"	киңуваҳāның
kinguvaqwaaqun	pos	IPA	later on	particle	киңувақӱāқун
kinguyak	pos	IPA	stern of boat	No information given.	киңуяк
kingwaaq	pos	IPA	third of three floats of whaling gear	No information given.	киңӱāқ
kinkut	pos	IPA	who? (plural)	look under kina	кинкут
kipiinaghmun	pos	IPA	continuously in the opposite direction	particle	кипӣнаӷмун
kipu-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kipiinaghmun, kipughmun, kipullegmun, kipullegte-"	кипу-
kipughmun	pos	IPA	the opposite direction	particle	кипуӷмун
kipullegmun	pos	IPA	in the opposite direction	"particle; Ii, quyaknaqniiqaa aghnaghaam piyaqminigu, tengvimun, kipullegmun, naangan piyaqminigu. ‘The girl thought she (her mother) would be happy, but her mother’s reaction was just the opposite.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:246)"	кипульыгмун
kipullegte-	pos	IPA	to alternate; to pass (and miss) coming from the opposite direction; to take turns	"kipullegtaa ‘he passed her as  she was going in one direction and he coming from the other direction’ or ‘he took her place or his turn right after her’ / kipullgutuk ‘they2 passed and missed each other’; aghnaghaat kipullgutaqluteng qepghaghtut ‘the girls worked in shifts, alternating with each other (taking turns)’"	кипульыхты-
kir'pisa	pos	IPA	Russian brick tea	"the dry tea came in the form of bricks or blocks  with scoring for dividing it (as with certain chocolate bars nowadays), and was used as currency as well as for making the beverage in former times; the ""r"" in this word is voiced (indicated with the apostrophe); see Boaz 1913:450, and also the discussion of this word in Jacobson2001:40."	кирпися
kirwaayulga	pos	IPA	bag with shoulder strap	No information given.	кирӱāюлга
kisaan	pos	IPA	"rock weight tied hanging from and holding down the walrus hide roofing of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	кися̄н
Kisii	pos	IPA	projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus toward east end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Кисӣ
Kisiim Naayghaa	pos	IPA	hill with VABM “White” on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Кисӣм Нāӥӷā
Kitayeghmii	pos	IPA	Chinese person	Chukotkan (V&E); Kitayeghmiit ‘Chinese people’	Китаӥыӷми
kiteghqe-1	pos	IPA	to overcook (meat)	"ugket kiteghqepagyaaghii igunakesi ‘keep an eye on the meat, don’t let them over cook, serve them’; kiteghqegkameng ilangi neghyugigatut ‘some people don’t like to eat overcooked food’"	китыҳқы-1
kiteghqe-2	pos	IPA	to tightly pull the rope on a pulley	iighsuutet kiteghqiteki ‘tighten the pulley ropes’; kiteghqelluki wiin nuqneghteki ‘hold the ropes on the pulley tight’	китыҳқы-2
kiti	pos	IPA	cat	No information given.	кити
kitugh-	pos	IPA	to pass; to go by; to surpass	kitughaa ‘he went past it or her’ /	китуӷ-
kitum	pos	IPA	who? (relative case)	look under kina	китум
kivaagh-	pos	IPA	to calm down; to lessen; to abate; to slacken	qiyalleghllagkek kivaaghtuk ‘his crying has lessened’; eslallugllak kivaaghtuq ‘the heavy rain has slackened’	кивāӷ-
kive-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kivaagh-, kiive-, kiivnigh-, kiivnin"	кивы-
Kiwatangaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Киӱатаңаӷмӣ(т)
kiwavaq	pos	IPA	east-northeast	No information given.	киӱавақ
kiyaghfik	pos	IPA	house; dwelling; camp	No information given.	кияҳфик
kiyaghlliqe-	pos	IPA	to contain something; to have something or somebody	Chukotkan (R)	кияҳльиқы-
kiyaghneq1	pos	IPA	way of life; God	No information given.	кияӷнық1
kiyaghsigate-	pos	IPA	to always be busy; to never be idle	Chukotkan (R); literally: ‘to never (just) be’	кияҳсигаты-
kiyaghtaalleghqaq	pos	IPA	everything necessary for living	Chukotkan (R)	кияҳтāльыҳқақ
kiyaghte-	pos	IPA	to be; to reside; to live; to be alive	kiyaghtuq ‘it lives’ / naten kiyaghtaqsin? ‘how are you?’; pinitun kiyaghtaqunga ‘I’m doing fine’; kiyaghtaqunga Sivuqami ‘I live on St. Lawrence Island (or in Gambell)’	кияҳты-
kiyaghun	pos	IPA	pupil of eye	No information given.	кияӷун
kiyaghute-	pos	IPA	to support; to provide for; to live by (it)	kiyaghutaa ‘he is supporting her’ or ‘he is living by it’ /	кияӷуты-
Kiyalighaq	pos	IPA	Kialegak	"old village site on Southeast Cape of St. Lawrence Island; its inhabitants, all except one of whom died in the famine of 1878-1879, are said to have spoken a language different from the present language of the island; no one knows exactly what their language was, or whether it was a form of Yupik or another language; = Kigalighaq; see Map 6 in Appendices"	Киялиӷақ
kiyang	pos	IPA	mostly; usually	"particle; Amighqwaaq kiyang atkukaqsaqangat, sukilpaq, alpa, metghaq, kang'ghwaagmengllu atkukayuguyaghpetut. ‘Parkas were usually of bird skin; crested aukle, murre, eider, and oldsquaw were used in parkas.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:104); Tawanillu Pinaghvigmi kiyang matum qiighqam qawaaga kaatquutkayuk. ‘In the same month of June mostly this island’s bird population came back.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:136); Kiyang quyngimetutemneng nallukegkegka sangwaa ilanga, nemun tagilqungigalnguunga kiyang quyngimetkayugulghiinga qayughllak. ‘I was unaware of some things going on because I was usually with the reindeer. I didn’t go home since I spent most of the time with the reindeer.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:64)"	кияң
kiyaqurragh-	pos	IPA	to loaf; to do nothing	Chukotkan	кияқушаӷ-
kufi	pos	IPA	coffee	No information given.	куфи
"kugaaq, kuwaaq"	pos	IPA	common murre (Uria aalge)	No information given.	кугāқ. куӱāқ
kugeq	pos	IPA	brother of female	"kuuggha ‘her brother’; kuugqa, kuughqa or kuugh’qa ‘my brother’; Jesus-em pikaa, ""Kuugghen makellequq unguvalleghmun."" ‘Jesus said to her, “Your brother will be raised to life.”’ (John 11.23)"	кугық
kuguutitke-	pos	IPA	to not want to leave (him) feeling one's help or company is needed	kuguutitkaa ‘he doesn't want to leave her’ / Iwerngaqun kuguutitkeghngaaghmegtegnegu unitkaak. ‘However they left him behind even though they didn’t want to leave him.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:30)	кугӯтиткы-
kukawae	pos	IPA	tripod	"Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, kukawet, for one tripod"	кукаӱаы
kukeghqugh-	pos	IPA	to have a throbbing pain	No information given.	кукыҳқуӷ-
kukegte-	pos	IPA	to shine light; to ignite	"kukegtaa ‘he shined light on it’, ‘ignited it’ /"	кукыхты-
kuketun	pos	IPA	very brightly	particle	кукытун
kukguuy	pos	IPA	oh!	"particle; an exclamation of surprise, fear, wonder or dismay at having undergone an experience; = kakuuy, kuy, kuukguuy"	кукхӯӥ
kukik	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kukikrak, kukingquq"	кукик
kukikrak	pos	IPA	grapnel hook; treble hook	No information given.	кукикшак
kukilngae	pos	IPA	chain with hook at end for hanging a pot over a seal oil lamp	"used in the plural, kukilnget, for one chain; the hook itself is termed aremaataq"	кукилңаы
kukingquq	pos	IPA	"ivory hook; hook on hooked device, angalqataq, for seals; hook on fishing lure"	angalqatama kukingqghwi unniistaapiguut ‘the hooks on my hooked device are too flexible’	кукиңқуқ
kukisae	pos	IPA	cookie	kukiset ‘cookies’	кукисаы
kukragniite-	pos	IPA	to be easily accomplished; to not be hard to do	kukragniituq ‘it is easily done’ / kukragniilnguq ‘something that is easily done’	кукшагнӣты-
kukrak	pos	IPA	person who is clumsy and slow to learn or perform	No information given.	кукшак
kukriqe-	pos	IPA	to have a difficult time	kukriquq ‘he is having a hard time’ / kukriqutkaa ‘he is having a hard time with it’	кукшиқы-
"kukugugg,"	pos	IPA	oh good!	particle; = kwugg	кукугух
Kukulegtuuk	pos	IPA	Kookooliktuuk River on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Кукулыхтӯк
Kukulek	pos	IPA	Kookoolik	site of former village on St. Lawrence Is.; see Map 5 in Appendices	Кукулык
Kukulget1	pos	IPA	hilly area by Itxat R. west of Old Chaplino in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Кукулгытӱ
Kukulget2	pos	IPA	Kookooligat Mountains on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Кукулгыт2
kukumtugh-	pos	IPA	to try to get at something before others do or before it is too late; to fear being left out or deprived of one's chance	kukumtughtuq ‘he is trying to get at something first’ / kukumtuutkaa ‘he is trying to get at it first’	кукумтуӷ-
kukumyalqi-	pos	IPA	to whistle	kukumyalqiiq ‘he is whistling’ / kukumyalqitaa ‘he is whistling at her or to her’	кукумьяльқи-
kukupagaghaq	pos	IPA	young ribbon seal (Phoca fasciata)	No information given.	кукупагаӷақ
kukupak	pos	IPA	female ribbon seal (Phoca fasciata)	Qazigyat ayumiqunaqutnginaq taapngigsimaaqegkangi. Kukupaget unglleneghtungitneng seghleqaqiit. ‘After a year spotted seal (skin-boots) would soak through. To them ribbon seal (skins) were bad as they shrank too much.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)	кукупак
kulngagh-	pos	IPA	to go slack; to sag	kulngaghtuq ‘it sagged’ / kulngaghtaa ‘he slackened it’	кулңаӷ-
kulngallaagte-	pos	IPA	to wither; to fade	Chukotkan (R); cf. kulngagh-	кулңалья̄хты-
kulusim qawaaga	pos	IPA	Ross' gull (Rhodostethia rosea)	"literally, ‘iceberg’s bird’"	кулюсим қаӱāга
kulusiq	pos	IPA	"chunk of ice in sea, seen early in season, blue in color, rounded by water action, arises from old pack ice; iceberg (though not from glacier)"	"also used in the dual dual, kulusik, for one, smaller, chunk; see items 30-31 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	кулюсиқ
Kulusiq	pos	IPA	Kolyuchin in Chukotka (well northwest along Arctic coast from main Yupik area)	see Map 1 in Appendices	Кулюсиқ
kumaagte-	pos	IPA	to be infested with lice	kumaagtuq or kumaagtaa ‘he is infested with lice’ /	кумāхты-
kumagh-	pos	IPA	to be on fire; to be lit; to ignite	kumaghtuq ‘it got lit’ / kumaghtaa ‘he lit it’; kumaghughaquq ‘it is really burning’	кумаӷ-
kumaghraasiq	pos	IPA	alcohol primer for kerosene pressure device	"naakek kumaghraasik gaaghnaqunga ‘where is the alcohol primer, I am going to cook!’"	кумаӷрāсиқ
kumaghugh-	pos	IPA	to grow (of flame)	No information given.	кумаӷуӷ-
kumak	pos	IPA	louse	No information given.	кумак
kumakigh-	pos	IPA	to delouse	kumakightuq ‘he deloused himself’; kumakighaa ‘he deloused her’ /	кумакиӷ-
kumeg-	pos	IPA	to scratch to relieve an itch	kumegtuq ‘he scratched himself’; kuumgaa ‘he scratched her or it’ /	кумыг-
kumegagh-	pos	IPA	to rake	kumegaghtuq ‘he raked’; kumegaghaa ‘he raked it’ / kumegaasit ‘rake’	кумыгаӷ-
kumekereqagh-	pos	IPA	to scratch lightly repeatedly	No information given.	кумыкырықаӷ-
kumgayaaq	pos	IPA	striped thing	No information given.	кумгая̄қ
kumi	pos	IPA	cold sore	No information given.	куми
kumk-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kumkelleghaq, kumkiili-; = kemk-"	кумк-
kumkelleghaq	pos	IPA	food particle between teeth	No information given.	кумкыльыӷақ
kumkiili-	pos	IPA	to pick one's teeth; to remove food particle from between teeth	kumkiiliiq ‘he picked his teeth’ / = kemkiili-	кумкӣли-
kumkiilin	pos	IPA	toothpick	#NAME?	кумкӣлин
kumkiilisiq	pos	IPA	toothpick	#NAME?	кумкӣлисиқ
kumkuyalqi-	pos	IPA	to whistle	Chukotkan (R); = kukumyalqi-	кумкуяльқи-
kumla-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kumlaaghqe-, kumlama-, kumlaneq, kumlaqugh-, kumlaregagh-, kumlasighvigek, kumlate-, kumlavik, kumlamiigh-"	кумля-
kumlaaghqe-	pos	IPA	to freeze solid	kumlaaghquq ‘it froze solid’	кумля̄ҳқы-
kumlama-	pos	IPA	to be frozen	kumlamaaq ‘it is frozen’ /	кумляма-
kumlamiigh-	pos	IPA	to eat meat frozen	maklagmeng kumlamiighelta ‘lets eat bearded seal frozen’	кумламӣӷ-
kumlamiigh-	pos	IPA	to eat frozen meat	No information given.	кумламӣӷ-
kumlaneq	pos	IPA	frozen part; permafrost	No information given.	кумлянық
kumlaqugh-	pos	IPA	to get frostbitten	Gginaqa kumlaquumaa. ‘My face is frostbitten.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 52); Kumlaquumaanga ullungamkun. ‘ I got frostbitton on my cheek.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 169)	кумляқуӷ-
kumlaregagh-	pos	IPA	to begin to freeze	kumlaregaghtuq or kumlaregaghaa ‘it began to freeze’ /	кумлярыгаӷ-
kumlasighvik	pos	IPA	freezer; ice house	"also used in the dual, kumlasighvigek, for one freezer"	кумлясиӷвик
kumlate-	pos	IPA	to freeze; to have cold hands and/or feet (or other body part)	kumlatuq ‘it froze’; iiggenka kumlatut ‘my hands are cold’	кумляты-
Kumlavik	pos	IPA	October	"literally, ‘time of cold’; also given in various sources as August, August-September, September, and September-October"	Кумлявик
kumlii-	pos	IPA	to have one’s hands become extremely cold and nearly frostbitten	yuuk taana saapghangilnguq kumliingigatngwaaghtuq ‘that man doesn’t complain that his hands being cold’; kumliimaghmi ayviiguq ‘he butchered the walrus with his hands really cold’	кумлӣ-
kumlu1	pos	IPA	thumb; bolt (of gun)	No information given.	кумлю1
kumlu2	pos	IPA	the number five (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"cf. kumlu1; the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	кумлю2
kumlullguunaq	pos	IPA	pipit (Anthus spp.)	No information given.	кумлюльхӯнақ
kumlulqugnak	pos	IPA	arctic warbler (Phylloscopus borealis)	Kumlulqugnak nalugtuq napaqam nuvugakun. ‘A warbler landed on top of a pole.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 82)	кумлюльқугнак
Kumlulquuyak	pos	IPA	projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus near west end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Кумлульқӯяк
kumyugte-	pos	IPA	"to gather, reducing in size, an opening of something flexible; to pucker the lips"	kumyuglluni kukumyalqiiq ‘he puckered up his lips and whistled’; kalngagam paaynga kumyuglluku qilleghtugu ‘gather the opening of the bag and tie it’	кумьюхты-
kunukaq	pos	IPA	kind of marsh grass	Chukotkan; exact identity undetermined	кунукақ
kurgela	pos	IPA	cheerful person	Chukotkan; cf. kurwaawi-	кургыля
kurraaq	pos	IPA	one who gets cold easily	No information given.	кушāқ
kurriiqe-	pos	IPA	to get cold readily	"kurriiqumaluku sivungani apeghiightunga ‘while he was getting cold, I finished before him’; aqlaghami kurriiqmikun maklagtani aftaa ‘he butchered his bearded seal catch in the cold even when he was complaining about the cold’"	кушӣқы-
kurugaq	pos	IPA	pig	"uncertain how the Russian word for ‘cow’came to mean ‘pig’; though at least one pig is known to have been brought to St. Lawrence Is.; Akituqat sungaat miluutegpenaki kurugaghnun, luuraq tutmaasghaqnayukatki. ‘Neither cast ye your pearls (expensive beads) before swine, lest they trample them under their feet.’ (Matthew 7.6)"	куругақ
"kurugiiq, kuruwiiq"	pos	IPA	ivory gull (Pagophila eburnea)	No information given.	"куругӣқ, куруӱӣқ"
Kurupka	pos	IPA	village on Val’karvaam R. in Chukotka	to the west of the Yupik area in Chukotka; see Map 1 in Appendices	Курупка
Kurupkeraq	pos	IPA	fomer village east of Cape Chukotskii in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Курупкырақ
kurwaawi-	pos	IPA	to be joyful for no particular reason	Chukotkan (V&E); cf. kurgela	курӱāӱи-
kusgae	pos	IPA	dirt	No information given.	кусхаы
kusge-	pos	IPA	squeamish; finicky	emotional root; kusgeyugtuq ‘he feels squeamish’; kusgekaa or kusgeyukaa ‘he feels squeamish over it’; kusgenaq ‘something that makes one feel squeamish’; kusgenaghtuq ‘it makes one feel squeamish’; kusgeketaghtuq ‘he is often squeamish’	кусхы-
kusgeluughqe-	pos	IPA	to make dirty	kusgeluughqaa ‘he got it dirty’ / 	кусхылю̄ҳқы-
kusgetu-	pos	IPA	to be dirty	kusgetuuq ‘it is dirty’ /	кусхыту-
kusukaq	pos	IPA	glaciated spot where water has dripped and frozen on ground or other surface	No information given.	кусюкақ
kuufkallghugh-	pos	IPA	to pour excessively	"Chukotkan (V&E); kuufkallghughtuq ‘it is pouring (rain, water)’"	кӯфкальҳуӷ-
kuuk	pos	IPA	cook	No information given.	кӯк
kuukeq	pos	IPA	ivory piece between head and shaft of harpoon	No information given.	кӯкық
"kuukgun, kuukguta"	pos	IPA	source of light	"Taana nighuk kuukgutnguuq mamlegmi, … ‘That radiance was a source of light in the darkness, …’ (John 1.5)"	"кӯкхун, кӯкхута"
kuukgute-	pos	IPA	to give light; to shine; to kindle a flame	"kuukgutuq ‘it is shining’; ighaleqetaaq kuukgutuq, asivaam tungagakun ‘a star is shining from the east’ (from a hymn); kuukgutaqaa naaghsaq ‘he is striking the match’"	кӯкхуты-
kuukguuy	pos	IPA	oh!	"particle; an exclamation of surprise, fear, wonder or dismay at having undergone an experience; = kakuuy, kuy, kukguuy"	кӯкхӯӥ
kuulae	pos	IPA	coal	also used in Chukotka	кӯляы
kuumgun	pos	IPA	"a certain plant used for scouring cooking utensils, probably horsetail (scouring rush) (Equisetum fluviatile); comb= for grass"	"used in the plural, kuumgutet, for one such comb; traditionally such combs were made of ivory"	кӯмгут
kuuni	pos	IPA	horse	"Pimakangat, ""Qikmighllak inga ugighsaghsugnighllawaaghuuq."" Ruuseghmiim taam qineghlluni pimakangi, “Qikmiinghituq kuuniguuq ugighsiituq.” ‘They told him, “There’s a huge dog out there and it really looks mean.” The Russian angrily told them, “It isn’t a dog; it’s a horse, and it’s not mean.” (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:208)"	кӯни
Kuusmae	pos	IPA	Christmas	Quyanaghhalek Kuusmemi ‘Merry Christmas!’; Quyanaghhaghmeng Kuusma ama quyanalghii nutaghaq ayumiqulleq or Quyasqelluten Kuusmemi ama nutaghami ayumiqulleghmi ‘Merry Christmas and a happy new year!’	Кӯсмаы
Kuusmeyagh-	pos	IPA	to go somewhere for Christmas	No information given.	Кӯсмыяӷ-
kuusneq	pos	IPA	pelvis bones of person or animal	"used in the dual, kuusneghek, for one person's or animal’s pelvic bones"	кӯсньық
"kuutu-, kuutughmete-"	pos	IPA	to be pigeon-toed	kuutuuq or kuutughmetuq ‘he is pigeon-toed’ / kuutughmelnguq ‘pigeon-toed person’; cf. kuutughte-	"кӯту-, кӯтуӷмыты-"
kuutughte-	pos	IPA	to turn one’s toes inward	kuutughtuq ‘he turned his toes inward’; cf. kuutu-	кӯтуҳты-
kuuve-	pos	IPA	to spill; to pour	kuuvuq ‘it spilled’; kuuvaa ‘he spilled it’ / kuuviiq ‘he spilled something’	кӯвы-
kuuvragh-	pos	IPA	to set a seal net	No information given.	кӯвраӷ-
kuuvraq	pos	IPA	seal net	No information given.	кӯврақ
kuvaghaan	pos	IPA	small flat-bottomed ivory bird figurine used in a certain game	kuvaghaatet ‘set of bird figurines used for the game’	куваӷāн
kuve-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > kuuve-, kuvesilghaq, kuvugh-"	кувы-
kuvesilghaq	pos	IPA	dump; trash container	No information given.	кувысилӷақ
kuvugh-	pos	IPA	to intermittently spill or pour	kuvughaa ‘he spilled it out in several actions’	кувуӷ-
kuvuqaq	pos	IPA	bullet	Chukotkan	кувуқақ
"kuy, kuuy"	pos	IPA	oh!	"particle; exclamation of surprise, fear, wonder or dismay at having undergone an experience; = kakuuy, kukguuy"	"куӥ, кӯӥ"
kuyagaaq	pos	IPA	meat from spinal area	Chukotkan (R)	куягāқ
kuyaguq	pos	IPA	spinal sinew	Chukotkan (R)	куягуқ
kuyak	pos	IPA	spine (upper part); keel of boat	No information given.	куяк
kuyak	pos	IPA	crack in ice	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, kuyagek, used for one such crack"	куяк
kuyapegaq	pos	IPA	vertebra; gear; cogwheel; pinion	"the ‘gear, cogwheel, pinion’ meaning is Chukotkan (R)"	куяпыгақ
kuykuna	pos	IPA	duckling	Chukotkan (R); naayvami qawaaq igleghtaquq kuykunatuumaghmi ‘in the lake there’s a bird going along with a duckling’	куӥкуна
kuyngae	pos	IPA	pipe (for smoking)	No information given.	куӥңаы
kuyngeraaq	pos	IPA	small vessel for sacrifice	Chukotkan (R)	куӥңырāқ
kuyulngae	pos	IPA	very deep part of river or channel	"used in the dual, kuyulngek, used for one channel; esneghagni kuyulngek elqughaghllukek iteghtukut aghqitaghitaghtegpenaamta ‘we went through the deep part of the channel without getting into the shallow part’"	куӥулңаы
kwugg	pos	IPA	oh good!	particle; = kukugugg	кӱух
laag-	pos	IPA	to dig	laagtuq ‘he dug’; laagaa ‘he dug it’	ля̄г-
laaghigh-	pos	IPA	to reach edge of  shore ice or shoreword edge of pack ice; for edge of ice to break off	No information given.	ля̄ӷиӷ-
laak	pos	IPA	lock	"used in the dual, laagek, for one lock; also used in Chukotka"	ля̄к
Laakaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	also called Ugaliit	Ля̄каӷмӣ(т)
laalighfike-	pos	IPA	to visit	laalighfikaa ‘he visited her’ /	ля̄лиҳфикы-
laalighqwaagh-	pos	IPA	to visit around house to house	No information given.	ля̄лиҳқӱāҳты-
laalighte-	pos	IPA	to visit	laalightuq ‘he visited’; laalightaa ‘he visited her’ (for some speakers); others use laalighfike- (q.v.) /	ля̄лиҳты-
laaliq	pos	IPA	visitor	"laalit ‘visitors’; Entaqun uygureghaneng maaken laalineng ungipamsugmeng nagaqughaqaqa government-emnguq maana quyngiliqaqegkanga igataghllagmeng kenlekluku. ‘From hearsay and from visitors, I heard that the government established the reindeer herd because of the famines.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:10) "	ля̄лиқ
laalit	pos	IPA	visitors from another place	"always (?) plural; apparently a direct nominaliztion of laalighte-, without te;  laalit qakun uteghnighnaqaqat? ‘when are the visitors returning to their home?’; laalit aqelqaghniighnaqaqiit ‘they are going to challenge the visitors in games (like wrestling and running)’"	ля̄лит
laalmeghqun	pos	IPA	rope used to fasten ribs of boat to frame	Chukotkan (R)	ля̄лмыҳқун
laalmik	pos	IPA	rib of bent-rib boat; floor piece which lies perpendicular to and across the keel in a flat-bottom boat	No information given.	ля̄лмик
laaq	pos	IPA	inner edge of pack ice; open water between shore ice and pack ice; flaw polynya; shore lead	see item 36 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ля̄қ
laar’ta	pos	IPA	lard; shortening	No information given.	ля̄рта
Laavlaaghmii	pos	IPA	Saami; Laplander	"Saami, previously termed Laplanders,were brought to St. Lawrence Island and other parts of Alaska around the turn of the century to introduce reindeer herding; Taagken Laavlaaghhaat neqngat aglaataghput. … Pinit net taakut, Laavlaaghhaat, quyngimeng piit. ‘We ferried the Laplanders’ provisions. … They were good people those Laplanders, they dealt with the reindeer.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:50)"	Ля̄вля̄ӷмӣ
laawaaq	pos	IPA	dug out hole in ground for storing meat	No information given.	ля̄ӱāқ
lalala	pos	IPA	dew on grass	No information given.	ляляля
Laluramkae	pos	IPA	white person; Caucasian	No information given.	Лялюрамкаы
laluwaay	pos	IPA	dried onion; onion; wild chive (Alium schoenoprasum)	"= laluwaayae; laluwaayet ‘onions’, ‘dried onions’, or ‘wild chives’"	лялюӱāӥ
laluwaayae	pos	IPA	dried onion; onion; wild chive (Alium schoenoprasum)	"= laluwaay; laluwaayet ‘onions’, ‘dried onions’, or ‘wild chives’"	лялюӱāӥы
lampa	pos	IPA	lumber; board	also used in Chukotka	лямпа
langetaq	pos	IPA	maybe; might; likely; I think	"Chukotkan; particle; = lengetaq; Aa-a weni inga umiilegput aqnighaquq aqsamineng. Langetaq aqfalleqaatnga. ‘Okay, our chief is in pain from his stomach. Maybe they’ll come get me.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 29); Angigum pii Ukaziq, “Qinuyupigtunga.” “Langetaq ughugnaquten, enkaam qinuyugtuten.” akitaa Ukazim. ‘Snow said to Hare, “I’m very upset.” “Most likely you’re going to melt, and (that’s why) you’re upset.” Hare answered him.’ (AANGHHAQ 37)"	ляңытақ
lata	pos	IPA	letter (correspondence or letter of the alphabet); epistle (in the Bible)	No information given.	лята
lata-	pos	IPA	to write a letter	"lataaq ‘he wrote a letter’; lataa ‘he wrote a letter to her’ / Inuughnguq taana igaqayuugtevyiiqaalghii, umiilganun latasluku aghveghniighyat. ‘That Inuuq had learned to write a little, and they had him write a letter to the captain of the whaling ship.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 18)"	лята-
lavyu	pos	IPA	sweetheart	#NAME?	лявью
legalngu-	pos	IPA	to feel that one shouldn’t be wasteful; to be careful with what one has; to conserve things	legalnguuq ‘he feels that he should be careful with something that he has and conserve it’ /	лыгалңуқ
legalnguke-	pos	IPA	to feel that one should conserve (it); to value	legalngukaa ‘he feels that it is too valuable to waste’ /	лыгалңукы-
legalngun	pos	IPA	how fortunate (in one’s catch)!	particle; legalngun una unangsaamaaq ‘how fortunate; this one got a lot of seals’; legalngun tepaq sivungiisimaa ‘how fortunate; he picked the sea food before anyone else could’	лыгалңун
legalngunaghhalek	pos	IPA	how valuable it is!	particle	лыгалңунаҳалык
legan	pos	IPA	and so; so that; sure!; go ahead and do it!	"particle;  suflugameng puyguluta guututfut legan qalqalimangwaaghuuftuq ‘we forgot to bring a gun and so the only weapon we had was a hatchet’; tumet atughanka legan tunaget pinit igleghhrakeggnat ‘I followed a trail that was so smooth that it made me go faster’; kaay, sangan mekelghiighhaq legan qelpeghunneghmeng aghtuumaaq aqlaghaghllagmi muluughllagem iiggngi legan ilanqut ‘oh, the cold was so extreme that the poor little boy couldn't open the door for so long that his hands are cold as ice’; ‘Qavaghllagtuq elngaatall umupiglluku. Nanghiiqwaaghsaqminigu legan teghtunghituq qapragteghngaatni. ‘She slept very deeply. And so when he tried even though he nudged her, she didn't wake up.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:10); ""Aa-aa-aa, meghmun nagneghnaaghtuten!"" ""Estugenkami taakut, legan pakinegllequnga, nuqneghllequnga."" ‘“Oh-oh, you might go right into the water!” “These nails then, I’ll dig them into the ground and hang on.”’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:6)"	лыган
leganamen	pos	IPA	almost able to do something	particle	лыганамын
leganqun	pos	IPA	as though; good job!	particle	лыганқун
legasiighwagh-	pos	IPA	to have fun in a way inappropriate for the situation; to make fun of someone or something; to act crazy	"Apamta legasiighwaghtesnanighaqiinkut samengllu kinkunengllu. ‘Our grandfather told us not to make fun of anything or anyone.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 83); Legasiighwaamaghmi qitevaquq. ‘He is talking crazy.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 83); Legasiighwaghtenun apeghtuusaqegpenaki Kiyaghneghem Akuzitangi, qayughllak qikmistunllu kurugaghestunllu ayuqut. ‘Don’t give God’s Word to scoffers, as they are like dogs and pigs.’ (Mathhew 7.6)"	лыгасӣӷӱаӷ-
legh-	pos	IPA	to expel flatus; to fart	see also leq	лыӷ-
legha-	pos	IPA	to be unable to breathe due to crying (of infants mostly)	leghaaq ‘he can't breathe due to his crying’ /	лыӷа-
leghlleq	pos	IPA	emperor goose (Chen canagica)	No information given.	лыҳльық
leghni	pos	IPA	rotten odor	meghutek tepeghllaguuk leghniighsimaak ‘the can is stinky; it now has a rotten odor’; maatneghmelnguut neqet leghniighsugumaat ‘food that stays in warm areas tend to get a rotten odor’	лыӷни
leghni	pos	IPA	flatulent smell	No information given.	лыӷни
leghughtaq1	pos	IPA	sound of distant continuing gunfire	No information given.	лыӷуҳтақ1
leghughtaq2	pos	IPA	accordian (musical instrument)	No information given.	лыӷуҳтақ2
legra- / legre-	pos	IPA	to be nosy; to be curious; to be inquisitive	"legraaq ‘he was being nosy, was snooping’ / the base, if used with suffix that begins with a consonant rather than a vowel, is legre-: legretkaa ‘he was nosy about it, snooped into it it’; legrefqaavek ‘don't be nosy!’; Ellnga qayughllak legrengigatuq . … Sasqeqaghtaqlinkut ipa meghtiisqiinkut, kayusiitesquq, taghnughhiqutesquq, legrenayukamta. ‘She, for some reason, was not inquisitive. … She would tell us to do many things, such as fetch water, help her, or take care of children, thinking we might be inquisitive.’  (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:138); = regla-, regra-"	лыгра- лыгры-
legreghllak	pos	IPA	nosy person; curious person	No information given.	лыгрыҳльяк
legreliqe-	pos	IPA	to inquire; to probe or snoop around	No information given.	лыгрылиқы-
lelaqa	pos	IPA	dog	Chukotkan (R)	лыляқа
lengaaghuute-	pos	IPA	to ring	lengaaghuutuq ‘it rang’; lengaaghuutaa ‘he rang it’ /	лыңāӷӯты-
lengaaq	pos	IPA	sound of bell; ringing sound	No information given.	лыңāқ
lengerit	pos	IPA	every time; always; it will happen (for the good)	"Chukotkan; particle; lengerit aghneghtughtekagu masaghiyaaghlleqaa ‘when the days are longer, it will get warmer’; lengerit qenwat pinaaghtut ‘the ice in the rivers is finally breaking up’"	лыңырит
lengetaq	pos	IPA	maybe; might; likely; I think	Chukotkan; particle; = langetaq	лыңытақ
lengkae	pos	IPA	avalanche	No information given.	лыңкаы
lengke-	pos	IPA	for snow to fall in an avalanche on one	lengkaa (or lengkevikaa) ‘it (avalanche) fell on him’ /	лыңкы-
leq	pos	IPA	flatus; fart	see also legh-	лық
levekluk	pos	IPA	"deep hollow vibrating sound (like a plane, boat, or thunder in the distance)"	levekluguutuq ‘it made a deep hollow sound’	лывыкльюк
liighqe-	pos	IPA	to cut out a pattern; to make a plan (on paper)	liighqaa ‘he cut the pieces for it’ / liighqiiq ‘he cut out pieces for something’	лӣҳқы-
liighqisiq	pos	IPA	scissors (when used in dual); knife or saw for cutting out pattern	liighqisigka ‘my pair of scissors’	лӣҳқисиқ
liighqutaq	pos	IPA	pattern for sewing or otherwise making something	No information given.	лӣҳқутақ
liigi	pos	IPA	something known; something sensed	"liigi anuqliqestaq kellghiit wiin esghapakaghyaqlegestun ‘the ones leaving by boat knew the wind was picking up, they should’ve watched the weather’; cf. liite-"	лӣги
liigike-	pos	IPA	to recognize; to sense; to understand; to be aware of (it)	"liigikaa ‘he recognized it, sensed it’ / liigikiiq ‘he sensed something’; liigikestuq ‘he revealed who he was’; liigiknaghtuq it is understandable’"	лӣгикы-
liigiketagh-	pos	IPA	to be quick-witted; to be shrewd	Chukotkan (R)	лӣгикытаӷ-
liigilliigh-	pos	IPA	to fully understand; to learn completely; to master (a subject)	"naten igleghtestaqutkek liigilliiqufkek aghtughnanighlleqagken ‘if you fully learn how to start it, you won’t have any problems with it’; maaqellghek liigilliighlukek ayuqagket ‘they have learned how the current runs’; Qineghpeghwaaghaqelghiinga liigilliighyama. ‘I’d scout with binoculars when I got to know (the area).’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:156)"	лӣӷильӣӷ-
liilightugh- 	pos	IPA	to advise; to instruct concerning how to life; teach the rules and ways of life	liilightughtuq ‘he is teaching or advising’; liilightughaa ‘he is teaching him or advising him’ / liilightughaa meghnalisqelluku ‘he advised him to rest’ 	лӣлиҳтуӷ-
liilightuusaq	pos	IPA	law; rule of conduct; admonition	"liilightuusat aapghumiit igam igleghneghi ‘the rules tell about how the school runs’; liilightuusat maliglluteng pinightut ‘it is good to follow rules’; Tamaatum liilightuusaa, eslam, sikum, meghem, maaqellghem,saamllu ilangan natetulnganeng liilluteng wetku ellmegneng mu-ghusaaghteghyuget nukalpigat. ‘Young men had to master the rules concerning weather, ice, sea conditions, currents, and other things they would learn about before they could go out hunting on the ice by themselves.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:130)"	лӣлиҳтӯсяқ
liinnaquma-	pos	IPA	to always be ready and eager to learn; to be a studious person	liinnaqumalghiit kukriqigalnguut ‘those who are willing to learn don’t have any difficulties’; liinnaqumatmineng ilamineng pillek ‘due to his willingness to learn he knows more than the others’	линьақума-
liipghange-	pos	IPA	to become aware; to become conscious; to come to one’s senses	"qikmiq suumelghii liipghangluni qimagtuq ‘the dog was berserk, but when it came to its sense, it ran away’; ifkaghluni liipghangyalghiiminguq nevaghmeteftuq ‘he fell and got knocked out, and when he regained conciousness, he realized that he was laying on his back’; cf. liite-"	лӣпҳаңы-
liiqneq	pos	IPA	scrap of material; leftover material	No information given.	лӣқньық
liisagh-	pos	IPA	to teach	often (or even usually (?)) refers to teaching a song / liisaghtuq ‘he is teaching (a song)’; liisaghaa ‘he is teaching her (a song)’ /	лӣсяӷ-
liisaghagh-	pos	IPA	to learn well and remember (of young person); to comprehend well at an early age	"uyuqliighngaaghmi liisaghaatmineng neqamikii nallukegkiit ‘even if he is young, he remembers what the others don’t know’"	лӣсаӷаӷ-
liisaq	pos	IPA	something (especially food) put aside for someone	"taana liisaaguq tuguyaqunaan ‘that is being saved for someone, don’t take it’; naagu liisaqa ‘where’s my food that you saved for me’; liisalguyaghtuten aviituq ‘there was something set aside for you, but it’s gone’; = lliisaq"	лӣсақ
liisima-	pos	IPA	to be knowledgeable	"liisimalghii ‘knowledgeable person, wise person, authority on something’"	лӣсима-
liisimake-	pos	IPA	to know	liisimakaa ‘he knows him or it’ /	лӣсимақы-
liisuqe-	pos	IPA	to recognize	uyavanlluku liisuqaat nalluniilnguq ‘they recognized him from far away because it was easy to tell it was him’; liisuqneghmeng aghtughaat sangutanga ‘they couldn’t recognize what it was’; akuzilghii kinangutanga liisuqaa iglagakun ‘he recognized who was talking with is voice’	лӣсуқы-
liite-1	pos	IPA	to learn; to gain awareness of one's surroundings (said of a young child)	liituq ‘he learned’; liitaa ‘he learned it’ /	лӣты-1
liite-2	pos	IPA	to leave something (usually food) for another	No information given.	лӣты-2
linggha-	pos	IPA	to hesitate to ask again due to having already asked and not received a response; to be tired of asking repeatedly without results	lingghaaq (or lingghayugtuq) ‘he hesitates to ask’ / lingghakaa ‘he hesitates to ask her’	лиңӷа-
lingghayagute-	pos	IPA	to be uncomfortable; to feel awkward	No information given.	лиңӷаягуты-
lipeghsagh-	pos	IPA	to send for something; to send someone with instructions; to leave instructions; to place an order for something	"lipeghsaghtuq ‘he sent for something’; lipeghsaghaa ‘he sent for it’ / lipeghsaataa ‘he sent for something for her, sent instructions for her’"	липыҳсяӷ-
lipeghsaq	pos	IPA	responsiveness	Chukotkan (R)	липыҳсяқ
llaaghaaghyugnagh-	pos	IPA	to be probable	No information given.	лья̄ӷāӷьюгнаӷ-
llaaghan	pos	IPA	it's true; certainly; surely; really	"particle; Yugughtekumtanguq avelghallemta kenlenga liilleqaghput. Llaaghan maaten piyalghiikut, avelghaghaatallemta kenlenga qivghunapigsimaa liisimangilngughni. 'When we becom men we will learn starting from what we missed. Sure enough, now, we regret not learning what we missed out on.' (SIVUQ. UNGIPAGH. 3)"	лья̄ӷан
llaaghanam	pos	IPA	truthfully; definitely	"llaaghanam tawaten apelleghtun taawani aflumi siqineq piituq ‘it was true about they said about when the sun would rise’; aapghaqekangit aangqallguniluki, llaaganam pillepiguftut esghapagyaqeput ‘they say that the ball team was really good, and it was true, they were really good when we watched them’"	льāӷанам
llaaghanwha	pos	IPA	and then	"particle; Aanluni, anigusighaqluni, meghek anigumeng keviimakek. Llaaghanwha itegaan asingi aghimakangi. 'She went out, gathered snow, and filled her water bucked with snow. And consequently the bottoms of her feet got soaked.' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 9); Llaaghanwha aghnaghaam nagaquumakanga. Taagken aanumalghii. Llaaghanwha aghnaghaq palaghhaghmeng  iyataneghmini neghaqelghii. ‘And then the girl listened to him. After that he went out.  And then whenever the girl got too hungry she would eat.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 72)"	лья̄ӷанӱьа
llaaghinaan	pos	IPA	good thing!	"particle; expresses satisfaction for having made a good choice in one’s actions; llaaghinaan angyaamaanga, llaaghanwha neqetukut ‘good thing I went boating, we got food’; llaaghinaan apeghtughilghiit nagataqaput ‘good thing we listen to them teaching’; cf. llaaghan"	льāӷинāн
llaaghwneq	pos	IPA	muscular person; person with large muscles	"yuget iknaqughikat llaaghwneghet ‘men who became strong, have very large muscles’; mataghsalghiimi llaaghwnepiguftuq ‘when he took off his chothes, he turned out to have large muscles’"	льāӷӱнық
llaak	pos	IPA	"the extremities of the body of a whale, person, etc."	No information given.	лья̄к
llagigh-	pos	IPA	to cut off	Chukotkan (V&E)	лья̄гиӷ-
llangaqa	pos	IPA	looks as if; looks like; sounds like; apparently	"particle; Mangteghapigit taagantusaghpetut, llangaqa maaken aaftaghaghluteng taagavek. ‘Their traditional houses were out that way, and it seems like that were separated from here.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:10); Taana llangaqa eghqwaaq nangllegsiisiiguq ama igamsiqayugusiiguq. ‘Apparently that ceremony of making offerings was to show one’s compassion and thankfulness.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:206)"	льяңақа
lleqa	pos	IPA	it turns out; on the contrary	Chukotkan; particle	льықа
lleve-	pos	IPA	to decorate or be decorated; to sew or be sewn with a fancy design	kaamgek ulimaaghqek llevlutek ayuquk ‘the skinboots she made have a fancy design’; ughnegegni llevlukek kakiiqaak ‘she is sewing them with a fancy design’	льывы-
llevlu-	pos	IPA	to put fancy handywork on garment	No information given.	льывлю-
lli-	pos	IPA	to place; to put; to set	llii ‘he put it (somewhere)’ / navek llizigu? ‘where did you put it?’	льи-
lliigh-	pos	IPA	to become a certain way; to start living in a certain place	"lliightuq or lliighaa ‘he became (thus)’ / ‘Sivuqamun lliightuq ‘she started living in Gambell’; Elpeklu tawaten lliighnaquten whangkutestun. ‘And you are going to become like us.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II 37); Taam kingunganeng elngaatall aghveghniiq akuzisaghanguq qafsin'ggaawaqluni lliightuq. ‘After that the issue of whale hunting was discussed prominently, and reached the point that only a few could be taken. (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:34); Iwerngaqun herder-ngughsimaamta money-ngiighhaghmeng ilaluta lliighiinkut. ‘But when we became herders it became such that we were paid with a little bit of money.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:82)"	льӣӷ-
lliighqaq	pos	IPA	piece of skin that has been cut out	cf. liighqe-	льӣҳқақ
lliisaq	pos	IPA	something (especially food) put aside for someone	Chukotkan (R); cf. lli-; = liisaq	льӣсяқ
lliivneqegsagh-	pos	IPA	to flatten the surface of something	liivneqegsaghluku nuna tiintat nekegteki ‘flatten the ground and set up the tent’	льӣвнықыхсяң-
lliivneqegtaq	pos	IPA	"flat surface (usually, of a rock)"	uyghagem qaaynga lliivneqegtaq llivikigu ‘put something on the flat top surface of that rock’	льӣвнықыхтақ
llilagh-	pos	IPA	to command to go somewhere; to send (a person) somewhere; to chase away (an animal)	"apeghtughaaghluku taaqsamigu llilaghaa ‘after he taught him thoroughly, he sent him out’; nuuk unaksaghqaq taaga llilaghaa ‘he chased away the surfaced seal that was to have been caught’"	льилаӷ-
llilegh-	pos	IPA	to have more than what is needed	"pinaqneghutmeggneng quunpeng llileghluteng ayuqaqut ‘because of their aggressiveness, they always have more than what they need’"	льилыӷ-
llimtaaq	pos	IPA	something stored away for the future	No information given.	льимтāқ
llineghllugte-	pos	IPA	to place something somewhere and forget where it was placed; to misplace	llineghllugtaa ‘he misplaced it’ / igani llineghlluglluki ivanghiighutii ‘having forgotten where she placed her book she looked all over for it’; iganka navek llineghllugsimaanka ‘I have misplaced my book’	льиныҳльуҳты-
llinghinaghmeng	pos	IPA	"with only moderate strength, tension or effort; lightly"	particle; iighsuutet wiin llinghinaghmeng nengteki ‘stretch the pulley only slightly (for now)’	льинӷинаӷмың
llivegh-	pos	IPA	to inter; to bury	lliivghaa yugem taghnughhani tuqukaq ‘the man buried his dead child’	льивыӷ-
llivelghaq	pos	IPA	shelf	"may be used in the dual, llivelghak, for one shelf"	льивылӷақ
lliveq	pos	IPA	grave	"lliivghet ‘graves, graveyard’"	льивық
llivike-	pos	IPA	to pay; to place something on (it); to get even with (him)	"llivikaa ‘he paid him’, ‘he put something on it’, or ‘he got even with him’ / Asengenka qamaglluki llivikanka. ‘I paid all my bills.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 34); Piitesghaghmeng llivikagka tuqukam salngagkek. ‘He put flowers on the coffin of the one who died.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 86)"	льивикы-
lluqwaaq	pos	IPA	alaria (Alaria sp.)	No information given.	льюқӱāқ
lluu-	pos	IPA	to use a sling as in hunting	"lluuguq ‘he used a sling’; lluugaa ‘he used a sling against it (target, game animal)’ / lluuluku ‘(after) using a sling on it’"	лью̄-
"lluu, lluuq"	pos	IPA	sling for hunting	"used in the dual, lluuk, for one sling"	"лью̄, лью̄қ"
Lluughraq	pos	IPA	Lorino in Chukotka (north of main (Central Siberian) Yupik area)	see Map 1 in Appendices	Льӯӷрақ
Lluughvik	pos	IPA	April	"literally, ‘time of hunting with a sling’; also given in various sources as March, March-April, and May"	Лью̄ӷвик
lluukegkaq	pos	IPA	something caught with a sling	"lluuquyaghluni lluukegkani tugullghisimakanga ‘he went out hunging with a sling, and he didn’t retrieve what he caught with his sling’"	лью̄кыхкақ
lluuqu-	pos	IPA	to hunt with a sling	No information given.	лью̄қу-
Lluuquvik	pos	IPA	Shlokovik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Льӯқувик
lluuquyagh-	pos	IPA	to go bird-hunting with a sling	"ugavek sukilpaanun lluuquyaq qawiimalghii ‘the person who went hunting with a sling for auklets, caught a lot of birds’; lluuquyaghluni lluukengumalghii ‘he went hunting with a sling and caught something’"	льюқуӥаӷ-
lluuyaq	pos	IPA	gyrfalcon (Falco rusticolus)	cf. lluu	лью̄яқ
lughtughaq	pos	IPA	small shiny fish type; smelt	exact identification undetermined; = nughtughaq	люҳтуӷақ
lugtu	pos	IPA	type of lava	No information given.	люхту
luufsagh-	pos	IPA	to fix something up; to make something or someone look nice; to smooth out; to make presentable	luufsaghtuq ‘he fixed himself up’; luufsaghaa ‘he fixed it up’ /	лю̄фсаӷ-
luuq	pos	IPA	edge of a large expanse of shorefast or moving ice	"dual, luughek, used for one such edge; see item 33 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	лю̄қ
luuraq	pos	IPA	in case; might; maybe; perhaps	"particle; Amen nunamnun aglaghnaanghitunga. Luuraqlu nunamnun kaaskuma ugima tuqulleqanga. ‘See, I won't go to my hometown. It might be that if I go home, my husband will kill me.’ (UNGIPAGH. 11); Atkugmeng kelqegkaalghiinga, allightemeng, ayapghaatameng luuraq naalkuskumta aasightuusighqameng. ‘I brought a parka, boot insulation and mittens so that in case we find people, we can dress them.’ (PANGEGH. 54)"	лю̄рақ
maaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to run out of or finish up something quickly; to purposely leave none for others	"nengiisaghqaayalghii tugulaamakangat ilateng maaghaghlluki ‘he was supposed to get a share, but they all took a lot and they didn’t leave any for him’"	мāӷаҳты-
maaghraghvinlek	pos	IPA	seven	No information given.	мāӷраӷвинлык
Maaghraghvinlek aghneq	pos	IPA	Saturday	from Saturday being the seventh day of the week	Мāӷраӷвинлык аӷнық
maaghsiq	pos	IPA	kind of kelp	exact identification undetermined	мāҳсиқ
maakeste-	pos	IPA	to whip until thick and/or fluffy; to set something upright	"eslevaganeghmeggni aghnat maakesniiqiit igughhneghata ‘when women make a dish out of salmon-eggs, they say that they whip it with seal oil until it thickens to the right consistency’"	мāкысты-
maakumiu	pos	IPA	local resident	No information given.	мāкумӣ
maakut	pos	IPA	these	look under maana	мāкут
maalghuggaaghte-	pos	IPA	to be the only two remaining	maalghuggaaghtuk ‘they’ve become the only two left’	мāлӷухāҳты-
maalghuk	pos	IPA	two	"the word maalghuk is a dual, but the singular, maalghu, can also occur as in: tightughyaqminiki Uuleghmiit taakut maalghu sangwaa ataasiq laluramketillegraak uugtaataqayuk Pedersen-kun. ‘When he read them [the letters] he observed that one, maybe two. of those Uelen people could handle English having gone onboard with [Capt.] Pedersen.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:144); also, the plural, maalghut, can occur as in: Maalghut usikaataghaput ataasikun quyngikun, 150 pound-et coal-et ataasit. ‘We would transport two 150-pound apiece lots of coal with one reindeer [trip].’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:76); cf. maaghraghvinlek"	мāлӷук
maallgute-	pos	IPA	to get trapped in ice when boating	"maallgusaaghiisi taglaghtuullghaasi ‘be careful, don’t get trapped (by the ice), come to land now’; angyannguq unga maallgusimii ‘they say the boat is closed in by ice out there’"	мāльхуты-
maalliqun	pos	IPA	despite things being the way they are; anyway; serves him right!; at last	"particle; Piiqegkenka panigenka, maalliqun piniqsaliighllagaanga qavngaq ugumikeghllaglunga. ‘I tell my daughters that despite those things at last she feels quite positive towards me (now) whereas she once despised me.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:90); Pimakanga, ""Maalliqun whanga piiqaghhnaaghyukaghpenga."" Ii, aghuliiqaghlluni uutqaghtuq. ‘He said, “ha-ha, you didn’t catch me!’ But then it stopped and turned back!’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:172)"	мāльиқун
maam-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > maamkelli-, maamkestaaq, maamtu-"	мāм-
maame-	pos	IPA	to heal (of wound); to close over	maamuq or maamaa ‘it healed’ / kililqa maamuq ‘my cut healed’; maamtaa ‘he closed it in’; Kililqa itegamnilnguq maamumaaq. ‘The cut on my foot has healed.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 89); Segevneq sikumelnguq maamaquq. ‘The crack in the ice is freezing over.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 89)	мāмы-
maamelleq	pos	IPA	scar	No information given.	мāмыльық
maamghu-	pos	IPA	to fix temporarily or in a make-shift way	"qamiyngiilluni unaghsimeng teggusighlukek maamghulukek tagisiqumakek ‘when his sled broke, he used a stick for a make-shift repair for it, and then brought it home’; ayemellghet maamghuluki igleghtuq ‘he fixed the broken parts and left’"	мāмӷу-
maamkelli-	pos	IPA	"to become or make thinner, narrower or calmer"	"maamkelliiq ‘it got thinner, narrower or calmer’; maamkellii ‘he made it thinner, narrower or calmer’ /"	мāмкыльи-
"maamkestaaq, maamkestaaghhaq*"	pos	IPA	thin thing; narrow thing	maamkestaaghhaaguq ‘it is thin or narrow’ /	"мāмкыстāқ, мāмкыстāҳақ"
maamnalghii	pos	IPA	dressing for wounds; something that helps a wound to heal	No information given.	мāмналӷӣ
maamsa	pos	IPA	pancreas	No information given.	мāмся
maamtawha	pos	IPA	again; not again	particle; taghnughhaat mangteghamun mayughtuullaataghtut; maamtawhanguq ineghtiit ‘ the children climbd up onto the house again; again they were told not to do that’	мāмтахӱа
maamtu-	pos	IPA	to be thick or wide	maamtuuq ‘it is thick or wide’ / maamtuqaq ‘thick or wide thing’; Ayveghem amiirii kiightellghilluteng maamtuqat. ‘Unsplit walrus hide is quite thick.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 89); Angyanghitukut sallek maamtupigtuq. ‘We didn’t go hunting because the young ice was too wide.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 89)	мāмту-
maana	pos	IPA	this one; this kind; this one here; on to the next part; and then	"base: ma<t>-; extended demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: matum ‘(of) this one’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: maakut ‘these’; anaphoric pronoun: tamana (or tamaana) ‘this very one’; localis adverb: maani ‘here, in this place’; terminalis adverb: maavek ‘to here’; vialis adverb: maagun ‘through here’; ablative adverb: maaken ‘from here’; interjectional: maa ‘here!, here it is!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tamani (or tamaani) ‘here, in this very place’; as a particle: maana ‘end of quote’ or ‘on to the next part’, ‘and then’; anaphoric adverbial base with 3s possessor: tamaanganun ‘to around there’, tamaanganeng ‘from around here’"	мāна
maangnaqe-	pos	IPA	to try to soothe (a crying baby)	No information given.	мāңнаы-
maangnaqi-	pos	IPA	to try to stop a child from crying	"maangnaqim taghnughhateng kevgaaghumiita ilagaataqegkangit ‘they carry them and sing to the children when they are crying to help them stop crying’; maangniqem sayaghqani pinghitii ‘he was trying to stop a child from crying, so he didn’t do what he had been going to do’; cf. mangigh-"	мāңнақи-
maantek’ri	pos	IPA	small caliber gun	Chukotkan	мāнтыкри
maapi-	pos	IPA	to come here (to this general area)	Maapiighaatalleghput liisimakaqa. Maapiluta aglaghaqluta piighaataqani. ‘I remember how we’d go there and come here. We used to go there and come here again.’  (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:66)	мāпи-
maaqe-	pos	IPA	to drain out; to ooze; to flow; to run (of liquids)	"maaquq ‘it flowed or oozed out’ / maaqestaa ‘he let it flow, drained it’"	мāқы-
maaqelleq	pos	IPA	current in ocean	"used in the dual, maaqellghek, for the current"	мāқыльық
maaqfik	pos	IPA	faucet; pipe (for liquid)	No information given.	мāқфик
maaqiite-	pos	IPA	to be lightly dressed	Chukotkan (R)	мāқӣты-
maaqneq	pos	IPA	ocean current flowing from southwest to northeast	"used in the dual, maaqneghek, for the current; Upenghami maaqneghek iknaquughqaaghllakayugek. ‘In springtime the (north) current gets very strong.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 90)"	мāқньық
maaqute-	pos	IPA	to drift by with the current; for the current to carry one away (as in a boat)	maaqutaa ‘it (the current) carried it or him away’	мāқуты-
maaqutelleq	pos	IPA	mud in water	Chukotkan (R); maaqutelleghtuqaq naayvaq ‘muddy lake’	мāқутыльық
maasisu	pos	IPA	even; however; already; moreover	particle; = masisu; questioned	мāсисю
maaste-	pos	IPA	to be penetrated by the cold air or wind	aatkii ugmestaaghhaat sukalluni maastaa ‘his clothing was so thin that it was quickly penetrated by the wind’	мāсты-
maataghniimna	pos	IPA	"that one, the same one"	Chukotkan (R)	мāтаӷнӣмна
maateghhaq	pos	IPA	a short while ago; just now; right around here	particle; maateghhaq neghtunga ‘I just now ate’	мāтыҳақ
maateghniineng	pos	IPA	since a while ago	particle	матыӷниның
maateghniistun	pos	IPA	the same as a while ago	particle	мāтыӷнӣстун
maaten	pos	IPA	now; a little while ago	particle	мāтын
maaten ilangani	pos	IPA	on one occasion; one time	No information given.	мāтын иля̄ңани
maatenllaam	pos	IPA	this time for sure	No information given.	мāтынлья̄м
maatenta	pos	IPA	now you see!; there you have it!; I told you so!; I just told you	No information given.	мāтынта
maateqwaaqun	pos	IPA	a little while from now; shortly	Tengegkayuget maateqwaaqun kaallequt. ‘The airplane will arrive in a little while.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 90)	мāтықӱāқун
maaterugpak	pos	IPA	quite a while ago	No information given.	мāтырухпак
maatkagh-	pos	IPA	to suddenly clear up after blizzard	"maatkaghyalghiimi uga mangteghatlu aliightut ‘when it suddenly cleared up, the houses appeared’; llaaghinaan maatkaqaghaa, igleghneqa naallghutaqa ‘good thing it cleared up as I can now correct my course’"	мāткаӷ-
maatnegh-	pos	IPA	to be warm	maatneghtuq ‘it is warm’ / maatneghtaa ‘he warmed it’	мāтньыӷ-
maatneghsiisiq	pos	IPA	heater; heat radiator	No information given.	мāтньыҳсӣсиқ
maatneq	pos	IPA	warmth	No information given.	мāтньық
maavesngwaaq	pos	IPA	heavy fog	Chukotkan (R); cf. maavek (look under maana)	мāвысңьӱāқ
maayghaaq	pos	IPA	bark of tree; hollow end of walrus tusk	No information given.	мāӥӷāқ
mae	pos	IPA	voice	"menga ‘his voice’; … tawaten mem taghtughtaqegkanga, piiqegkangat “Kii, aghnaghaghhaq una igamsiqanaghhalek nangllegtapigta” ‘… the voice awakened her as they were saying, “My goodness! How grateful we should be for her kindness.”’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198); cf. nepiiq"	маы
maghaq	pos	IPA	marshy area	No information given.	маӷақ
maghhuurka	pos	IPA	leaf tobacco	"An'giisimaluki igaghvigem manughaani, melugutaqun'nguq maghhuurkameng, … aqumuulluteng ilangi. ‘When they were outside taking a break in front of the school, they were smoking Russian tobacco, … sitting there, some of them.‘ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:208)"	маҳӯшка
maghlag-	pos	IPA	to invite to the dance floor during a particular indigenous Eskimo dance event held yearly followed by a gift exchange	done by cross-cousins	маӷляг-
maghlak	pos	IPA	gift exchange ceremony after a particular Eskimo dance event held yearly	involves bringing a cross-cousin to the floor to dance	маӷляк
maghqate-	pos	IPA	to lock up	"maghqatuq ‘it locked up’ or ‘he locked up’; maghqataa ‘he locked it up’ / maghqatngaaq ‘it is locked up, closed for the day (business or office)’"	маҳқаты-
maghqatusiq	pos	IPA	lock; padlock	"dual, maghqatusik, used for one lock; Mangteghaghput maghqatusilighaqa amigakun. ‘I put a padlock on the door of our house.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 95)"	маҳқатусиқ
maghuyugte-	pos	IPA	to tuck lower part of face in one's garments	done to ward off the cold or because of shyness or sadness; Ilangani ghhuunnemta maghuyugtaqukut. ‘Sometime when we are cold we tuck our faces inside our coats.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 90)	маӷуюхты-
maghyagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > maghyaghaghqugh-, maghyaghqugh-; = meghyagh-"	маӷьяӷ-
maghyaghaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to lead astray	maghyaghaghqughaa ‘he led him into mischief’	маӷьяӷаҳқуӷ-
maghyaghqelliin	pos	IPA	food that is eaten first; first course at a meal	"neghnaqelghiini sivukluki neghyaghqat maghyaghqelliitmeng nalighmen sivullughquutmeng aatqelghiit ‘at meal time, food that is eaten first is called “lead course” or “first course”’"	маӷьяҳқыльӣн
maghyaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to lead	"maghyaghqughtuq ‘he lead’; maghyaghqughii ‘he lead them’ / Elpek liisimakan tuma, maghyaghqughqut. ‘You know the wqay, so go ahead and lead us.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 46)"	маӷьяҳқуӷ-
maghyaghqughsiin	pos	IPA	towline of sled going all the way to the lead dog	maghyaghqughsiin qikmiin kepumakanga ‘his dogs cut the towline’	маӷьяҳқуҳсӣн
maghyaghqughta	pos	IPA	leader; lead dog	No information given.	маӷьяҳқуҳта
maka	pos	IPA	diaper or diaper-like thing	Neghnam aghnaanghan makaatangan asingi eslevagmeng imaqeftut. ‘Under the female crab’s sack there were eggs.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 91)	мака
maka-	pos	IPA	to diaper	makaa ‘he put a diaper on him’	мака-
makasitaq	pos	IPA	diaper cover	No information given.	макаситақ
makete-	pos	IPA	to stand up; to get up; to stand (it) upright	maketuq ‘he got up’; maketaa ‘he put it upright’ / maketen ‘get up!’; cf. makiga-	макыты-
makiga-	pos	IPA	to be in an upright or erect state or condition	"makigaaq ‘it is upright’ / kiti nevaan ifkaghtekuvgu makigaghmi tekillequq ‘if you drop a cat upside down, it will land upright’; makigaan lligu ulleghnayukan ‘place it upright in case it falls’; cf. makete-"	макига-
makigh-	pos	IPA	to gnaw on a bone with meat attached to it	makightuq ‘he or it gnawed on something’; makighaa ‘he or it gnawed on it’ / Neghsam tulimakek maalghuk makighagka. ‘I ate the meat from two seal ribs.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 91)	макиӷ-
makiigh-	pos	IPA	to split following the grain (of wood)	qamiskama suqaghneghaqaa makiighyan atughhneghitaqa ‘when the runner for my sled to-be started to split I didn’t use it’; sayugagma esnekek makiighaqeftuk ‘the rim of my drum happens to be splitting’	макӣӷ-
makilleq	pos	IPA	bone from which meat has all been picked or gnawed	No information given.	макильық
makiq	pos	IPA	bone with meat on it	No information given.	макиқ
makislak	pos	IPA	small bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)	its skin is used for boot soles and its face is somewhat reddish; cf. maklak	макисльяк
makite-	pos	IPA	to place one’s tail between ones legs	Chukotkan (R)	макиты-
maklagu	pos	IPA	intestines of bearded seal	"used in the plural, maklagut, for the intestines of one seal;  Maklagut saghnaaqsaqangit qaliiluki ama aghsughtaaluki. ‘People used to save bearded seal intestines for making raincoats or bleached gut wind jackets.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 91)"	макльягу
maklak	pos	IPA	adult bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)	cf. makislak	макльяк
Maklak	pos	IPA	site in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	макльяк
maklawaaq	pos	IPA	caterpillar	"… maklawaaghem  tugumaa.  Nenglunga inga, meghem esnenganituq.  Nunaaghem  aghnaa qerngughsimaa maklawaaghem. ‘… the caterpillar had taken her. Its house was there by the shore of the sea. The caterpillar had gathered [into captivity] the women of the camp.’ (MATERIALY 443);literally, 'pretend bearded seal, thing like a bearded seal'; cf. similar idiom in Central Yup’ik, where ‘caterpillar’ is u!u!uaq from Inupiaq u!$uk ‘bearded seal’ (or an obsolete Yupik cognate thereof); "	макльяӱāқ
maklegsaq	pos	IPA	snare for seagulls	No information given.	макльыхсяқ
makligha-	pos	IPA	to pull in a rope hand-over-hand or check to net this way; to shinny up or down a rope or pole; to get eggs on a cliff down on a rope	maklighaaq ‘he shinnied up or down; he checked a net’ / maklighaghaa ‘he shinnied up or down it; he checked it’	макльиӷа-
maklii-	pos	IPA	to butcher or otherwise prepare bearded seal	makliiguq ‘he butchered bearded seal’ /	макльӣ-
maklu	pos	IPA	"intermediate level of atmosphere, without much air"	No information given.	маклью
maklukestaq	pos	IPA	"surface of sea ice covered with small smooth bumps, suitable for hunting and traveling but causing boat and sled to vibrate when pulled across it"	see item 34 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	макльюкыстақ
makreg-1	pos	IPA	"to peel; to peel (off); to shed covering, skin, etc.; to strip off skin or the like"	makregtuq ‘it peeled or peeled off; its peel came off; it shed its covering’ / makregtaa ‘he peeled it’; makregutuq ‘he peeled something’; Piineluk makregtuq mangtegham minglenganeng. ‘ The old paint is peeling off from the walls of the old house.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 91); cf. makete-	макшыг-1
makreg-2	pos	IPA	to suffer anguish	No information given.	макшыг-2
makregaghte-	pos	IPA	to cause elevated abrasions; to scrape one’s skin on something	No information given.	макшыгаҳты-
makrughi-	pos	IPA	to have a difficult time doing something	No information given.	макшуӷи-
makruughi-	pos	IPA	to have a hard time doing something; to be unable to do something difficult	"kaasaqegka unangneghmeng makruughiiqeftuq nuugllagmi imani ‘when I got to him, he was having a hard time getting a seal even though there were so many’; makruughiyama qenwat iilqayugtunga ‘when I couldn’t do it, I finally gave up’"	макшӯӷи-
maksagaq	pos	IPA	young walrus with small tusks	Chukotkan (R)	максягақ
maksulqaghhiite-	pos	IPA	to show no sign of living presence; to be quiet and still	"nunaaghmelgnguut naghughtaput angyameng maksulqaghhiilnguut entaqun qavaatnguut ‘the people at the camp that we passed by in the boat showed no sign of their presence, probably all being asleep’; nunavaget maksulqaghhiilnguut piyaqeput tuqukaperugwaaghet ‘the still, quiet herd of walrus on ice that we came to turned out to be all dead’"	максюльқаҳӣты-
makughqugh-	pos	IPA	"to unharness, unfasten, or otherwise undo dogs"	makughqughtuq ‘he undid the dogs’; makughqughii ‘he undid them’ /	макуҳқуӷ-
makugneq	pos	IPA	shed fur or hair of animal	"qikmimta makugnegha mallaaghutuq ilunganilnguq ‘our dog’s hair that has been shedd is becoming messy  being inside (the house)’; teghigluget aqsamelluteng makugtaqelghiit enkaam makugneghtuumaghmeng aanaqut ‘baby bearded seals shed when they are in the womb still, so the shed hair comes out with the baby’"	макугнық
makugte-	pos	IPA	to shed; to moult; to slip out of a loop which holds one	"makugtuq ‘it shed; it slipped out’; makugtaa ‘he undid it (dog)’ / qikmiq makugutuq ‘the dog got loose, slipped out of its collar and tether’; Qimugsineng kaallunga qikmima qaghlungi makughqughanka. ‘After arriving from driving the dogs I slipped off my dogs’ harnesses.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 92); Unaaq elngaatall qilak makugaghtaa. ‘The clouds suddenly moved away this morning.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 92)"	макухты-
malghi	pos	IPA	twin	malghik ‘pair of twins’; malghikaqa ‘he is my twin’	малӷи
malghi-	pos	IPA	to give birth to twins	malghiiq ‘she gave birth to twin’ /	малӷи-
malghug-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > malghi, maaghraghvinlek, maalghuk, malghukaghte-, malghukli-, malghukuraaq, malghuuya-"	малӷуг-
malghughqe-	pos	IPA	to act in pairs; to divide in two	malghughqelluteng angyaghtut ‘they divided up the boating crew into two’	малӷуҳқы-
malghugneq	pos	IPA	two things; two groups	"used with a plural ending and therefore realized as malghugneghet, malghugneghneng, etc.; used to indicate two things, when the noun for that thing is used in the plural or dual even for a single entitity, or to indicate two groups (such as families), thus: Malghugneghet siifluki unkuset ataasikaghsimalghiit kaviighmeng. ‘Setting two traps, [they] caught [one] fox.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 151; note that dual, unkusek, is used for one ‘trap’); Taakwagun, qamiyet malghugneghet, … ‘[For that first trip here] two sleds [were used], …’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:156; note that dual, qamiyek, is used for one ‘sled’); Taakut pughileghmelnguut Agaankutlu, Anagutaankutlu malghugneghet. ‘Only two families were staying permanently at Southwest Cape, Agaq and family, and  Anagutaq and family.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:162)"	малӷугнық
malghukaghte-	pos	IPA	to act on things twice or two at a time	malghukaghtaan tunqughii ‘he gave them out two at a time’; malghukaghsimaaq kaviighmeng ‘he caught two foxes’	малӷукаҳты-
malghukli-	pos	IPA	to be undecided	malghukliiq ‘he is undecided’ / malghuklitkaa ‘he is undecided about it’	малӷукльи-
malghukuraaq	pos	IPA	ship with two masts	No information given.	малӷукурāқ
malghuutaq	pos	IPA	each of two shares given separately (when one given for both would have sufficed)	"nengiiskufsi malghuutaaluku nenginnakesi ‘when you are going to divide it, divide it into two, one for each person’; malghuutaaluteng nengitiinkung ighnequllghiigni ‘they gave me and my son separate shares’"	малӷӱтақ
malghuuya-	pos	IPA	to win twice at one time (as in double-jumping in checkers)	No information given.	малӷӯя-
malghuuya-	pos	IPA	to do something twice in a row	"Nayagama maalghugegneng malghuuyalunga kayaalqaanga. ‘My sister beat me [at checkers] by doing it to me [jumping my men] twice in a row, two times.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 92)"	малӷӯя̄-
malig-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > malighqagh-, malighqugh-, maligmun, maligsaagh-, maligte-"	малиг-
malighqagh-	pos	IPA	to chase after; to catch up with by chasing	Ullghitat aagkut malgighqaghnaqanka. ‘I am going to chase and try to catch up with those wheeled/tracked vehicles.’	малиҳқаӷ-
malighqugh-	pos	IPA	to chase	malighqughtuq ‘he chased something’; malighqughaa ‘he chased it’ /	малиҳқуӷ-
malighqutaama-	pos	IPA	to always follows the rules	"malighqutaamatmineng piniqnighllak ‘due to his following of rules, he is a favorite’; nuyeklightaghpesinun malighutaamalusi ‘follow the ways of your elders’"	малиҳқумāма-
malighqutaq	pos	IPA	ripple; sea swell	Chukokan (V&E)	малиҳқутақ
maligmun	pos	IPA	with the grain; following the common pattern	particle	малигмун
maligsaagh-	pos	IPA	to follow along; to follow the pattern	"maligsaaghtuq ‘he went along with the others, followed the pattern’; maligsaaghaa ‘he followed him or it’ /"	малихся̄ӷ-
maligsaaghta	pos	IPA	follower; disciple	No information given.	малихся̄ҳта
maligsaaghyaghqaq	pos	IPA	guide (book or the like)	No information given.	малихся̄ӷьяҳқақ
"maligte-, maligtagh-"	pos	IPA	to accompany; to go with; to follow	maligtaa ‘he went with him’ / maligutuq ‘he went along’	"малихты-, малихтаӷ-"
mallalghutaq	pos	IPA	trash container; garbage container	"used in the dual, mallalghutak, for one container"	мальялӷутақ
mallan	pos	IPA	broom	Chukotkan (R);  = aallgutaq	мальян
mallangllagh-	pos	IPA	to litter	No information given.	мальяңльяӷ-
mallaq	pos	IPA	particle of dust or debris	No information given.	мальяқ
malleg-	pos	IPA	to be or get close; to be or get next to	mallegtuq ‘it got next to something (expressed in the terminalis case)’; maallgaa ‘it got next to it’ / mallegtaa ‘he brought it next to something’; maallgutuq ‘he brought something close’; maallgutuk ‘they2 got next to each other’; sikuk malleghquk ‘the ice closed in’; cf. mateg-	мальыг-
malliigh-	pos	IPA	to sweep	malliightuq ‘he swept up’; malliighaa ‘he swept it’ /	мальӣӷ-
malliighusiq	pos	IPA	broom; bird wing used as broom; vacuum cleaner	"also used in the dual, malliighusik, for one such device"	мальӣӷусиқ
mallu	pos	IPA	carcass that has drifted ashore; beached carcass; unexpectedly encountered person	"mallunguq ‘he found a beached carcass’; Estugaghllunga ilakumtaaqa mallukaqa, kaanneghhaaftuq unaaq. ‘When I went to the story I ran into my friend who evidently had arrived this morning.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 93)"	малью
Mallu	pos	IPA	Matlyu in Chukotka; site near the head of Tkachen Bay in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Малью
mamaasiq	pos	IPA	bottle for nursing; baby-bottle	"used in the dual, mamaasik, for one bottle"	мамāсиқ
mamagh-	pos	IPA	to suck (at breast or bottle)	"mamaghtuq ‘he sucked’; mamaghaa ‘he sucked it’ / mamaghtaa ‘she let him suck, suckled him, breastfed him, nursed him’; mamaghtiiq ‘she is nursing a baby’"	мамаӷ-
mamaghiitaq	pos	IPA	brassiere	"used in the dual, mamaghiitak, for one brassiere"	мамаӷӣтақ
Mamaghnak	pos	IPA	Mamagnak Mts. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Мамаӷнак
mamaghnaq	pos	IPA	"burner nozzle; small opening where oil or gas flows out to burner of gas stove, lantern, ect."	"suksugtam mamaghnaa nuqutughqwaaluni kumangallgiisimaak ‘the gas stove’s burner nozzle hole became too big, so it hasn’t been burning quite as well as it had been’; mamaghnaa mellukegsan riighighluku kumaghtuk ‘we cleaned the fuel opening, and the device lit up’"	мамаӷнақ
mamaghtaq	pos	IPA	youngest child	No information given.	мамаҳтақ
mamaghti	pos	IPA	woman or female animal with a suckling child	No information given.	мамаҳти
mamaghwaaq	pos	IPA	type of edible seashore life orange in color with yellow dots	exact identification undetermined	мамаӷӱāқ
mamaq	pos	IPA	milk; breast; spike on ice-creeper	both milk from the breast and bottle milk	мамақ
mamasugni	pos	IPA	aged and whitened skin of beached walrus carcass	No information given.	мамасюгни
mamasugnite-	pos	IPA	to age and whiten (of the skin of a beached walrus carcass)	nanevgat mamasugnilngughmeng neghyuwaaghaqelghiit mallumeng ‘the old men usually want to eat the aged white part of the skin of a beached walrus carcass’; mallu taawa mamasugnilnguq ‘there (is) a beached walrus with aged white skin’	мамасюгниты-
Mamlagnaq	pos	IPA	site on St. Lawrence Is. on opposite side of mountain from Apetiki Camp (Tapghuq)	see Map 4 in Appendices	Мамлягнақ
mamleg-1	pos	IPA	to be dark	mamlegtuq (mamlegluni) ‘it is or was dark’ /	мамлыг-1
mamleg-2	pos	IPA	to be closer to something	Chukotkan (R); mamlegngalghii minglemun qavaghvik ‘a bed that’s closer to the wall’	мамлыг-2
mamlegraagte-	pos	IPA	to start to get dark	No information given.	мамлыгрāхты-
mamlegte-	pos	IPA	to become dark	mamlegtuq (mamleglluni) ‘it became dark’ /	мамлыхты-
mamlegute-	pos	IPA	to block light; to cast a shadow on; to appear as a dark spot or form in front of it (it)	mamlegutaa ‘he is blocking her light’ /	мамлыгуты-
mamlek	pos	IPA	darkness	No information given.	мамлык
manaan	pos	IPA	"hook, line and sinker"	"used in the plural, manaatet, for one such fishing set"	манāн
managh-	pos	IPA	to fish with hook and line; to jig for fish; to catch (fish) with hook and line	managhtuq ‘he fished by jigging with hook and line’; managhaa ‘he caught it by jigging’ /	манаӷ-
manaq	pos	IPA	lure for jigging for fish; bait	No information given.	манақ
mangagigh-	pos	IPA	to remove outer layer of skin	No information given.	маңагиӷ-
mangagte-	pos	IPA	to loose (part of) outer layer of skin through rubbing or the like	No information given.	маңахты-
mangak	pos	IPA	outer layer of skin or hide	#NAME?	маңак
mangalquq	pos	IPA	callus	No information given.	маңальқуқ
mangek	pos	IPA	outer layer of skin or hide	amighqaq kiightekani maang’gakun aagteghllagumaa ‘she made the outer part of the skin she is splitting too thick’; amiiram maanggi kiyang qaasliiluki sangllaghaqiit ‘the outer part of the seal skin is usually on the outside when making something’; = mangak	маңык
mangghute-	pos	IPA	to tie rope securely	Chukotkan; questioned	маңӷуты-
mangigh-	pos	IPA	to stop crying	"mangightuq ‘he stopped crying’ / mangightaa ‘he helped her to stop crying’; cf. imaangigh-, mangsingugh-, mangyaangigh-"	маңиӷ-
mangilate-	pos	IPA	to spread in various directions	Chukotkan (V&E)	маңилят-
mangkeraasiq	pos	IPA	wrench	"used in the dual, mangkeraasik, for one wrench; also used in Chukotka"	маңкырāсиқ
mangki	pos	IPA	monkey	also used in Chukotka; Qawaagpagem tengunnaqumakanga unglutminun mankingiighhaq. ‘The giant bird was going to fly off to its nest with the little monkey.’ (AANGHHAQ 82)	маңки
mangneghrak	pos	IPA	rope for whaling made from hide of young female walrus; yearling walrus	mangneghragmeng tapghaghrangllaamalghii aghveghniighmi atughqameng ‘he make a new rope from young female walrus hide to use in whaling’	маңныӷрак
mangsingugh-	pos	IPA	to soothe; to calm	mangsingughaa ‘he soothed her’ / mangsingughiiq ‘he soothed someone’; cf. manigugh-	маңсиңуӷ-
mangtaaq	pos	IPA	bird's nest	"cf. mangteghaq; used in the plural, mangtaaghet, for one nest (with eggs); Mangtaaghhaat nalluniighiit takwaaghaataghnaluki, aflengaknalukillu. ‘They put a marker at the little nest so that they could come see it and watch over it.’ (PIYAA. 7)"	маңтāқ
mangtagregaq	pos	IPA	thin skin from whale mouth area	No information given.	маңтагрыгақ
mangtak	pos	IPA	edible black whale skin; muktuk	Aghveghem mangtaga qamaglluku pilagaat. ‘They cut all the skin off the whale.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 95)	маңтак
mangteghagh-	pos	IPA	to make a house for; to reassemble a house (in fall after its parts have been aired out)	direct verbalization of mangteghaq ‘house’	маңтыӷаӷ-
mangteghapik	pos	IPA	traditional dome-shaped Chukchi-style house with walrus skin roofing held in place by rocks hanging from the edge; yaranga	this term is used to distinguish the traditional Chukchi-style Eskimo house from a modern house; this style of house replaced the earlier semi-subterranean house (nenglu) and was itself replaced by  the Euro-American style frame house	маңтыӷапик
mangteghaq	pos	IPA	house	"this term is used to refer to the traditional Chukchi-style Eskimo dome-shaped house with walrus skin cover held down with rock weights hanging from the edges , called ‘yaranga’ in Russian, or to a modern house, as opposed to the earlier semi-subterranean house, nenglu; the term mangteghapik is used to distinguish the traditional Chukchi style house from a modern house; = mengteghaq"	маңтыӷақ
mangteghasqwaaq	pos	IPA	"summer house (often makeshift, of walrus hide)"	No information given.	маңтыӷасқӱāқ
mangteghiigh-	pos	IPA	to build a house	mangteghiightuq ‘he built a house’; manteghiighaa ‘he built a house for him’ /	маңтыӷӣӷ-
mangteghilleq	pos	IPA	site of former house or settlement; house ruins	No information given.	маңтыӷильық
mangtiisiq	pos	IPA	a particular incantation	Chukotkan (R)	маңтӣсиқ
mangughte-	pos	IPA	to surface or show the back when beginning to dive deeply (of whale)	"piigluku aghveq mangughsan aghveqaa ‘they followed the whale and when it was starting down for a deep dive, he struck it’"	маңуҳты-
mangugte-	pos	IPA	to lose some of the skin from the back (of a whale)	No information given.	маңухты-
mangugtekaq	pos	IPA	whale which has lost some of the skin from its back	aghveq mallungat mangugtekaaftuq iwernga asinga mangtalek ‘the beached whale carcass that they found didn’t have any skin on the back but the bottom had some’; qawiighneq talwa mangugtellghilnguq akuraamakangat ‘they found a whale (carcass) in the ocean that still has its skin’	маңухтыкақ
manguna	pos	IPA	thick walrus skin with hair	No information given.	маңуна
manguultaq	pos	IPA	dirt caked up on some part of one’s body	No information given.	маңӯльтақ
mangyaangigh-	pos	IPA	to sob uncontrollably after crying	cf. mangigh-	маңья̄ңиӷ-
mangzighhe-	pos	IPA	to gnaw	mangzighhuq ‘it gnawed’; mangzighhaa ‘it gnawed on it’ / mangzighhelleq ‘gnawed spot’	маңзиҳы-
mani	pos	IPA	money	"also used in Chukotka; Enkaam piniqnaanghitaghsi Kiyaghneq piniqumaluku mani. ‘Also, you won’t love God by loving money.’ (Matthew 6.24); Una qepghaqaq allgeqaaguq maningyama grant-meng …. ‘This project began when I received funds from a grant ….’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. xv)"	мани
mani-	pos	IPA	to move in close	"maniiq ‘he moved close to something’; manii ‘he moved close to it’ / cf.  maniguute-, maniighaghte-"	мани-
manigniigh-	pos	IPA	to gather eggs; to look for eggs	Tapghighlunga manigniightunga pennani. ‘I used a rope to hang onto while gathering eggs on the cliffs.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 129)	манигиӣӷ-
manigugh-	pos	IPA	to soothe; to calm	manigughaa ‘he soothed her’ / manigughiiq ‘he soothed someone’; cf. mangsingugh-	манигуӷ-
maniguute-1	pos	IPA	to worship; to beg; to present oneself in a pitiful way; to humbly request something	maniguutuq ‘he is being pitiful’ or ‘he is humbly requesting something’ / cf. mani-	манигӯты-1
maniguute-2	pos	IPA	to have eggs (of bird)	No information given.	манигӯты-2
maniguutusiq	pos	IPA	bribe	No information given.	манигӯтусиқ
manik	pos	IPA	bird's egg	manigniightuq ‘he looked for eggs’; manigtuq ‘he collected eggs’; maniliightuq ‘he cooked eggs’; manigtughtuq ‘he ate eggs’	маник
manilghu	pos	IPA	group of walrus coming to shore	No information given.	манилӷу
manilghutaq	pos	IPA	coin purse; wallet; bank	"used in the dual, manilghutak, for one wallet"	манилӷутақ
manimsag-	pos	IPA	to keep on coming or going over to something	qikmit manimsagnaqeghllaguut igatam ‘the dogs keep on coming over because of hunger’; neqet saapngalghiit manimsagumiit ‘they kept on coming to the food that was covered’; taghnughhaat iinghutkamun manimsagaataghllaguut ‘the children kept on going to the place they were told not to go to’	манимсаг-
manin	pos	IPA	fortification against enemy warriors	"used in the plural, manitet, for one fortification; akingani agani manitet taaganniiqsaghiit ‘they say that there used to be fortifications south of the village’"	манин
manitaq	pos	IPA	fixed protective shield (as used in warfare)	"used in the plural, manitat, for one such shield"	манитақ
mantelae	pos	IPA	mantle (for gas lantern or lamp)	No information given.	мантылаы
manu	pos	IPA	front; chest and neck area right below one’s face	manunga ‘its front’ or ‘his neck and chest’	ману
manughaq	pos	IPA	immediate front of house	No information given.	мануӷақ
manulek	pos	IPA	fin whale (Balaenoptera physalus)	No information given.	манулык
manuli-	pos	IPA	to be frosted (of lower part of parka ruff); to have a frosted ruff	manuliiq ‘he has frost on the lower part of his ruff (near his mouth and nose)’ or ‘it (ruff) is frosted’ /	манули-
manungiitaq	pos	IPA	bib (as for a baby)	No information given.	мануңӣтақ
maqaaghte-	pos	IPA	to warm up	maqaaghtuq or maqaaghtaa ‘he or it warmed up’ / siqineq maqaaghtaqaa ‘the sun is getting warm (as in spring)’	мақāҳты-
maqaasghaq	pos	IPA	insulation to keep heat in	Amim qaayngakun qakmagun eslataakun maqaasghightuutkaqegkangit. ‘They’d put it as insulation over the surface of the skin (of the house) out there.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:104)	мақāсҳақ
maqagh-	pos	IPA	"to be warm (of clothing, house, etc.)"	"maqaghtuq ‘it (clothing, house) is warm’ / maqalghii ‘warm clothing, house’; maqatun atkugtunga ‘I put on a warm parka’"	мақаӷ-
maqaghqe-	pos	IPA	to dress warmly	maqaghquq he dressed warmly; maqaghqaa he dressed her warmly /	мақаҳқы-
maqaghqun	pos	IPA	insulation to keep heat in	No information given.	мақаҳқун
maqalla	pos	IPA	green algae	iipagmi qalmesam maqallangi qiighninnaghllaget igleghlleghhiini ‘in extreme low tide the algae on the rocks is really slippery when one walks on it’; kiiwem esnekek maqallaghllaguftuq ‘the beach of the river turned out to have a lot of algae’	мақалья
maqaq	pos	IPA	"warmth (of clothes, dwelling, etc.); warm clothes; light and loose fitting snow-jacket made from thin skin of young reindeer"	"used in the dual, maqak, for one jacket"	мақақ
maqe-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > maaqe-, maqete-, maqughaghti-"	мақы-
maqete-	pos	IPA	to drain; to remove liquid from (it)	maqetaa ‘he drained it’ /	мақыты-
maqetisiq	pos	IPA	device used in making a liquid flow; milk-pail	No information given.	мақы̄тисиқ
maqiighsagh-	pos	IPA	to be inadequately dressed for the cold	Maqiighsapaglunga ghhuutaanga. ‘I got cold from not wearing enough clothes.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 88)	мақӣҳсаӷ-
Maqneghlugak	pos	IPA	site at northeast corner of Troutman Lake near Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Мақньыӷлюгак
Maqneq	pos	IPA	Maknik Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	or Maqneghem Naayvaa; see Map 6 in Appendices	Мақньық
maqughaghti-	pos	IPA	to shed tears	maqughaghtiiq ‘he shed tears’ /	мақуӷаҳти-
Maramaku	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Марамаку
masa-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > masaaghi-, masaqiighwagh-"	мася-
masaaghi-	pos	IPA	for weather to warm up in spring	masaaghiiq or masaaghii ‘it warmed up’ /	мася̄ӷи-
masaqiighwagh-	pos	IPA	sun oneself	"masaqiighwaatkelluku esnami qavaamalghiinga ‘while I was sunning myself at the beach, I fell asleep’; navek masaqiighwaghyaqaalta ‘let’s go out somewhere to lie in the sun’"	масақӣӷӱаӷ-
maseghiighusiq	pos	IPA	scraper for removing ice from fishing line	Chukotkan (R)	масыӷӣӷусиқ
masighagh-	pos	IPA	to warm oneself by stove or other heat source	masighaghtuq ‘he warmed up’; masighaghaa ‘he warmed it up’ / cf. masa-	масиӷаӷ-
Masingka	pos	IPA	St. Lawrence Island / Siberian Yupik Eskimo or Naukan Yupik Eskimo; as a particle: originally; genuinely; very; fully; sure thing; it’s alright; just fine	"this originally Chukchi term is used for ‘Yupik Eskimo’ by  some Chukotkan Yupik and some St. Lawrence Islanders who stem from Chukotka; also functions as a an adverbial or interjectional particle; Sivuughaqestaghngaamkun quyngiqa naavyighnayukan pingayiitaqa. ""Masingka legan itagnalghii!"" ‘Even though I hesitated thinking that my reindeer might be overwhelmed I did put the third one on it. “Sure thing; let’s do it; it will be fine”, (I said). (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:78); Kiyaghsimaaq Qigimi yuuk neqengyuqaq. Kiigunneghagu qayaghtuneghmini unakaqegkanga masingka uksumi naamatkaghqaq neqa. ‘There lived man, a good provider, in Qigi. Every summer he went out hunting and sure enough he’d get food sufficient for the winter.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 141); Uyughani pilaataghaa, ""Naqamllu whaa elpek pengegniighutaaten. Masingka nemetwhayaaghtaaten."" ‘She said to her younger brother, “You are no longer someone who one must worry about. You’ve gotten so that you can stay on your own just fine now.”’ (UNGIPAGH. 162)"	Масиңка
masinkate-	pos	IPA	to succeed at what one is doing; to do well; to prosper	"Yuget aghvengneghmeggni masinkataqut nunaaghet. ‘Whenever the people catch a whale, the village does well.’ (AANHHAQ 30)"	масинкаты-
masisu	pos	IPA	even; however; already; moreover	particle;  Meghmun ateghyalghiimi teghhanun pesughyukangghituq. Masisu esghaamakanga aga yuggaq tallileklu ighuleklu takestaaghhaghmeng naqam yugusii aangepiglleghhii. ‘He got to the bottom of the sea and had no difficulty breathing. Moreover [there] he saw a little person with long arms and legs and a big torso.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 93); = maasisu	масисю
masleg-	pos	IPA	to become skinny; to get thin; become emaciated	"neghqutkiillghem qikmiput taawa maslegtuutut ‘our dogs are getting skinny because we don’t have food for them’; iilqeghllagem qenwat maslegtuq ‘he’s getting thin, because he’s been so depressed’; Uukat kinenghhat, iwhani piniipigtut September-em uukaghtii. Kineghllagtestegpenaki qeghaataqelghiit eghqwaaghutkaghqaaluki. Aamta sivuliit August-em pingi maslekanighaqut. ‘September is best for drying cod. Before they get too dry they’d be bundled and stored. The first ones, those of August, would shrivel up.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:92)"	маслыг-
masugh-	pos	IPA	to get or go right to or on the edge	masughluku neghqwaagha ggaaygem uuupunnakek ‘let him cut it right on the edge of the shoulder blade’	масюӷ-
masuk	pos	IPA	"core of tusk, bone or root"	No information given.	масюк
mataawi-	pos	IPA	to have a hard time	mataawiiq ‘he had a hard time’ / mataawitkaa ‘he had a hard time over it’; mekelghiighhaam unangkani mataawisimaagu tuguneghmeng; kitum angyanun tugusqelligu ‘the boy was having a hard time retrieving the seal he’d caught; he should have had someone in a neighboring boat retrieve it’	матāӱи-
matagh-	pos	IPA	undressed; parka-less; coatless	"postural root; mataghtuq ‘he took off his parka or coat, or his clothes’; mataghngaaq ‘he is without a parka or coat, undressed’; mataghmi aanuq ‘he went outside without a coat’"	матаӷ-
mataghhwaagh-	pos	IPA	to dress lightly	aqlagha mataghhwaaghvigituq ‘there’s no way to get by dressing lightly  in the cold’; kiigmi mataghhwaaq itagnaghtuq ‘dressing lightly in the summer is fine’	матаҳӱāӷ-
mataghqe-	pos	IPA	to strip one’s clothes off; to remove outer garment	mataghquq ‘he removed his (own) outer clothing’ or ‘he stripped’; mataghqaa ‘he removed his (another’s) outer clothing’ or ‘he stripped him’ / 	матаҳқы-
mateg-	pos	IPA	to get stuck onto something; to come side by side with something	mategtuq ‘it got stuck on something’ / mategtaa ‘he stuck it on’; mategngaaq ‘it has been stuck on’; cf. malleg-	матыг-
mayaari-	pos	IPA	to feel weak and exhausted	mayaariiq ‘he felt weak and exhausted’ /	мая̄ри-
mayae	pos	IPA	pile of things; winnings in a game; heap	"maaynga ‘his pile, his winnings’"	маяы
mayagh-	pos	IPA	being or becoming thin	postural root; mayaghtuq ‘he became thin’ / ‘mayaghmelnguq one who is thin’; mayaghtekaq ‘one who became thin’; cf. wayagh-	маяӷ-
mayaneq	pos	IPA	one that is in poor condition from lack of (proper) food)	Chukotkan (R)	маянық
mayari-	pos	IPA	"to tire; to lose fragrance, taste or zest"	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	маяри-
Mayeghhaq	pos	IPA	site in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Маӥыҳақ
mayeqaan	pos	IPA	short boot with fold over insole	Chukotkan (R)	маӥықāт
mayeqelleghagh-	pos	IPA	to climb	… yuuk qineghquulluni elngaatall asitmun. Whangallu mayeqellegaghlunga qineghtunga. '… many a person was looking down from there. I too climbed up and looked down.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:190)	маӥықыльыӷаӷ-
mayeraaghpak	pos	IPA	giant	Mayeraaghpagem tuguluku naasquminun qaakumakanga. ‘The giant grabbed him and put him up on his head.’ (YUGG. Mayer. 13)	маӥырāҳпак
mayii	pos	IPA	slope; the way up	ikani mayiimi pegnem qaygeghtunga ‘I barely got to the top at the slope south of here’; Qayillghet mayiingat iggagrukegtepigtuq ‘the slope at Qayilleq is steep’; cf. mayugh-	маӥӣ
mayleghuke-	pos	IPA	to have doubts about (it)	"mayleghuklukek ullghitagni guutelleghqakek unisimakek ‘he didn’t think his snowmachine would start, so he left it’"	маӥлыӷукы-
mayleghunagh-	pos	IPA	to be doubtful; to appear unpromising	"apeghtuqii mayleghunaghtut liitelleghqii qayughllak pineghlliqutet nagategpenateng ‘her students  skills at learning don’t seem very promising because they don’t listen’; mayleghuklukek ullghitagni guutelleghqakek unisimakek ‘his snowmachine’s capability of starting seemed doubtful, so he left it’"	маӥлыӷунаӷ-
Mayngeguk	pos	IPA	former village on south shore of Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka 	see Map 3 in Appendices	Маӥңыгук
mayngeq	pos	IPA	skinny one	Chukotkan (R)	маӥңық
mayugh-	pos	IPA	to go up; to ascend; to climb	mayughtuq ‘he went up’; mayughaa ‘he went up it’ / mayuutaa ‘he took it up’	маюӷ-
mayughaataq	pos	IPA	ladder; staircase; steps	"used in the dual, mayughaatak, for one ladder or staircase"	маюӷāтақ
Mayughii	pos	IPA	Cape Myaughee on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Маюӷӣ
mayughneq	pos	IPA	pile; heap; sternpost of boat; bowpost of boat	No information given.	маюӷнық
mayughtaq	pos	IPA	driftwood that is piled on the beach (to be visible and to dry) to be taken later; heap; pile	"used in the plural, mayughtat, for one pile; aqfayaqenka mayughtat aviitut ‘when I went to get the (site of the) piled up pieces of driftwood, they were missing’"	маюҳтақ
mayughti-	pos	IPA	to pile up wood or other things; to make a pile	mayughtiiq ‘he made a pile’ / quugmeng mayughtimaanga qawani anigukan aqfayaghqameng ‘I piled some driftwood east of here so that I can get it when snow falls’	маюҳти-
mayughvik	pos	IPA	route leading up	No information given.	маюӷвик
Mayughwaaq	pos	IPA	old village site at the foot of the mountain behind Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	маюӷӱāқ
mayugnite-	pos	IPA	to become snagged (of a hook getting stuck on something underwater)	mayugnitkat iqaniighusinka iikneghmeng aghtughanka ‘I can’t get loose my crabbing-hooks that are snagged (hooked in the rocks)’; taana anglaaq mayugninnapigtuq ‘it’s easy to get hooks snagged in that hole  made in the ice’	маюгниты-
megh<e>-	pos	IPA	"to drink (any beverage, especially one that is cool); to drink an alcoholic beverage"	"meghtuq ‘he drank’; meghaa ‘he drank it’ / in some respects this verb base acts as if it were megh- while in other respects it acts as if it were meghe-; the following example shows that in some cases both patterns are possible: meghenghituq or menghituq ‘he didn't drink’; megheghllaguuq ‘he is very drunk’; meghyaghqaq ‘something to drink’; meqayuk ‘one who drinks alcoholic beverages’; meghelghii ‘one who is drinking’; compare negh<e>-; see meq ‘water’, the nominal counterpart of this noun base"	мыӷ(ы)-
meghaaq	pos	IPA	puddle	meghaaghmi ‘in the puddle’	мыӷāқ
meghaataq	pos	IPA	soda pop; soft drink	No information given.	мыӷāтақ
meghaq*1	pos	IPA	seal breathing hole in ice; open water between large cakes of ice	"also used in the dual, meghaak, for one such hole"	мыӷақ1
meghaq*2	pos	IPA	beverage	No information given.	мыӷақ2
meghek	pos	IPA	large vessel for melting snow for water; area of open water in pack ice; polynya	look under meq	мыӷык
meghestivik	pos	IPA	cafe where one can drink	Chukotkan (R)	мыӷыстивик
meghhaq*	pos	IPA	small area of open water in sea ice where one can sit and watch for seals; childhood; infancy	"used in the dual, meghhaak, for one such area; see item 98 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004; the meaning ‘childhood, infancy’ is said to be from the child’s being in a fluid state of development; ighneni meghhaaneng peghqigsaqaa unangniighmeng ‘he taught his son how to hunt since his childhood’; ima meghhaatanganeng ‘since infancy’"	мыҳак
meghllak	pos	IPA	large area of open water; polynya	"used in the dual, meghllagek, for one such area"	мыҳльяк
meghnaali-	pos	IPA	to rest	Meghnaaliiqluta naayghamun mayughtukut. ‘We rested several times as we climbed the mountain.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 89)	мыӷнāли-
meghnak	pos	IPA	translucent amber-colored rock; agate	No information given.	мыӷнак
meghnugh-	pos	IPA	to be tired	meghnughtuq ‘he is tired’ /	мыӷнуӷ-
meghqe-	pos	IPA	to water; to sprinkle water on (it); for water to appear on ice; to splash water on (it); to apply water to (it)	meghqaa ‘he applied to or splashed water on it’ /	мыҳқы-
meghquute-	pos	IPA	to fall into the water	No information given.	мыҳқӯты-
meghraag-	pos	IPA	to be transparent; to be clear	nulughyalghiinga teghhani sama kayumeng esghaatunga qayughllak meq meghraakegtepiglleghhii ‘when I was fishing with a hook and line I saw a fish near the bottom because the water was very clear’	мыӷрāг-
meghraawayi-	pos	IPA	to be very light in color; to be transparent	No information given.	мыӷрāӱаӥи-
meghragti-	pos	IPA	to cry from emotional pain; to shed tears	meghragtiiq ‘he shed tears’; meghragtistaa ‘he made him shed tears’	мыӷрахти-
meghsi-	pos	IPA	to give a drink to a person or animal (dog usually)	meghsii ‘he gave him or it a drink’ /	мыҳси-
meghtagh-	pos	IPA	to fetch water	"meghtaghtuq ‘he fetched water’ / meghtaataa ‘he fetched water for her’; meghtaghvikaa ‘he fetched water from it, it’s the place where he got water’"	мыҳтаӷ-
meghtaghvik	pos	IPA	well; place to get water	No information given.	мыҳтаӷвик
meghun	pos	IPA	dipper; cup; can of food	"also meghuta; also used in the dual, meghutek or meghutak, for one such item"	мыӷун
meghutluk	pos	IPA	empty can	"used in the dual, meghutlugek, for one empty can"	мыӷутлюк
meghyagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > meghyaghaghqugh, meghyaghqugh-; = maghyagh-"	мыӷяӷ-
meghyaghaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to lead astray	meghyaghaghqughaa ‘he led him astray’	мыӷяӷаҳқуӷ-
meghyaghqaq	pos	IPA	something to drink	No information given.	мыӷьяҳқақ
meghyaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to lead	meghyaghqughtuq ‘he lead’; meghyaghqughii ‘he lead them’ /	мыӷяҳқуӷ-
meghyaghqughta	pos	IPA	leader; lead dog	"Qikmighhiinaghhaa meghyaghqughtenga Elqwaaghqum aapqaqaa kaatkaq. ‘According to Elqwaaqu, only his lead dog made it back.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:64)"	мыӷяҳқуҳта
megnu-	pos	IPA	caring deeply; valuing; holding as important	"emotional root; megnukaa ‘he cares deeply for him/it’; megnunaghtuq ‘it is important, it is valuable’; avaqutani megnukepiglluku anglistekaa ‘he raised his child caring deeply for him’; megnukumtaani saghyat kagpagii ‘he packed his important belongings’"	мыгну-
megnunagh-	pos	IPA	to be important; to be valued; to be treasured	"megnunaghtuq ‘it is important’ / megnunaghtuq qayughllak naamneng aatquq ‘she is treasured since she has my mother’s name’; … unguvalleq megnunaghataghaghtuq neqmeng, yugusiqlu megnunaghataghaghtuq aatkaneng. ‘… life itself is more important than food, and the body is more important than clothing.’ (Matthew 6.25)"	мыгнунаӷ-
meke-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > mekestaaq, mekelghiiq, mekelli-, mekitaghagh-, mekitkughmete-; cf. migligrungiq, miksagaq"	мыкы-
mekegragh-	pos	IPA	to smooth out or make even  with one’s teeth	"Ang, piighhangllaa. Nuvagsukaghpenaan mekegraghyukaghpenaan. 'Yes, braid [some thread], but don't even make a move toward moistening the strands with saliva or smoothing them out with your teeth.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:208)"	мыкыграӷ-
mekegte-	pos	IPA	to scrape off; to peel off; to strip off	maklagem qilungan qaayngi mekegtii neghyaghqaaluki ‘she scraped off the outer layer of a bearded seal’s intestines for eating’; kitum gginan mekegtagu? ‘who scraped (scratched) your face?’	мыкыхты-
mekelghiiq	pos	IPA	boy	mekelghiighhaq ‘little boy’; mekelghiighet ‘boys’; Mekelghiighhaamallemni esghapagllakaqegkegka Ungaziinkuk Sivuqaankuk naavghullutek ayuqelghiik. ‘When I was a little boy I used to see Chaplino and Gambell people going back and forth.’ (PANGEGH. 17)	мыкылӷӣқ
mekelli-	pos	IPA	to become smaller; to make smaller; to alter (by making smaller) in sewing	mekelliiq ‘it is getting smaller; mekellii he is making it smaller’ /	мыкыльи-
mekellin	pos	IPA	strip of fabric on a sail which can be tied to shorten the sail	No information given.	мыкыльин
mekestaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	small thing; little thing	mekestaaghhaaguq ‘it is small’; = mekestaaq	мыкыстāҳақ
mekestaaq	pos	IPA	small thing; little thing	mekestaaghmeng pilguunga ‘I have a small one’; mekestaaghuuq nanughtaa ‘the polar bear he got was a small one’; = mekestaaghhaq	мыкыстāқ
mekiitlek	pos	IPA	wolf fish (Anarhichas lepturus)	No information given.	мыкӣтлык
mekitaghagh-	pos	IPA	to be somewhat smaller	mekitaghaghtuq ‘it is somewhat smaller’ /	мыкитаӷаӷ-
mekitkughmete-	pos	IPA	to be somewhat smaller	tiintat sivulighneng mekitkughmetut ‘the tent is somewhat smaller than the first one’	мыкиткуӷмыты-
mekughmighalek	pos	IPA	walrus with long tusks that touch or cross at the tips	No information given.	мыкуӷмиӷалык
melangaaq	pos	IPA	downy feather; very young person (slang)	cf. melquq	мыляңāқ
melangute-	pos	IPA	"to come into indistinct view through darkness, mist, fog, etc. "	melangutuq ‘it came into indistinct view’	мыляңуты-
melghutaq	pos	IPA	water container; canteen	"also used in the dual, melghutak, for one container"	мылӷутақ
melighte-	pos	IPA	to perform shamanistic activity	Chukotkan (R)	мылиҳты-
meliqe-	pos	IPA	to send word; to pass the word	panigmikun meliqaa ‘she sent word by her daughter’	мылиқы-
meliqi-	pos	IPA	to send word by someone 	"kiiwhken Sivungameng meliqimalghii aqfaaghtesqelluni ‘he (from Savoonga) sent someone (to Gambell) for someone to come get him’; apeghiiqufsi meliqilghaasi aqfalleqamsi ‘when you (all) are finished, have someone come (and tell me) and I’ll get you’"	мылиқи-
melitaqe-	pos	IPA	to speak harshly to (him)	qepghaallghiit umiilgita sagiqiganniluki melitaqumakangi ‘the foreman spoke harshly to his workers becasue they weren’t putting enough effort into their work’; angyalgita nunmaagitneng melitaqaqii awen ‘their captain often spoke harshly to them because of their slowness’	мылитақы-
melite-	pos	IPA	to discipline with harsh language	No information given.	мылиты-
melkaaghte-	pos	IPA	to retrieve from the water	melkaaghtaa ‘he retrieved it’ / cf. meq	мылькāҳты-
mellaate-	pos	IPA	to be trapped by sea ice which has closed in around one	"angyaghuutkam ilangi mellaasimii ‘some of the boaters have been trapped by the sea ice closing around them’; mellaalluki angyat qavaghtaamalghiit ‘the boat was trapped in the ice, and they spent a few nights out there’; cf. meq or mellu-"	мыльāты-
mellig-	pos	IPA	to close tightly	Chukotkan (R);  cf. malleg-	мыльиг-
melliq	pos	IPA	type of edible root (?)	exact identification undetermined	мыльиқ
mellu-	pos	IPA	to plug; to cover an opening	mellaa ‘he plugged it’ / melliiguq ‘he plugged an opening’; mellulleqaa ‘he will plug it’	мылью-
mellugraaq	pos	IPA	bad water	No information given.	мыльюгрāқ
mellugragh-	pos	IPA	to growl	Chukotkan (R)	мыльюграӷ-
mellugtuqun	pos	IPA	button part of hair beads	No information given.	мыльюхтуқун
melluk	pos	IPA	rude person	Chukotkan (V&E)	мыльюк
mellutaq	pos	IPA	plug; cover for an opening	Qergesem mellutaa igaghqwaaq umuqaq apengtaqa aangyan. ‘I folded over the cardboard window covering  because it was [too] big.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 31)	мыльютақ
"melngu, melnguq"	pos	IPA	beetle; water beetle	Apayepayiiq uteghniimalghii nguuyngaaghaghmun.  Melnguq nunmaawhtapagem kinguliiluni kaasimalghii. ‘The spider returned to the fly’s house. Because the beetle dallied he returned last.’ (SULUWET 33)	"мылңу, мылңуқ"
melqiigh-	pos	IPA	to remove fur or body hair from skin; to lose fur	melqiightuq ‘it lost (some of its) fur or body hair’; melqiighaa ‘he took the fur or body hair off it’ /	мыльқӣӷ-
melqiighaq	pos	IPA	"dehaired skin (especially, of bearded seal)"	#NAME?	мыльқӣӷақ
melqiin	pos	IPA	rock used to pound sea mammal skin to remove the hair	Chukotkan (R)	мыльқӣн
melqiiqaq	pos	IPA	"dehaired skin (especially, of bearded seal)"	#NAME?	мыльқӣқақ
melqiite-	pos	IPA	to be bald; to have one’s lost hair	= melqite-	мыльқӣты-
melqite-	pos	IPA	to be bald; to have one’s lost hair	= melqiite-	мыльқиты-
melqughqwaaq	pos	IPA	feather or fur that has been strewn over an area	qawaagem melqughqwaagha qikmim mingiteghllagumaa ‘the dog has strewn the feathers all over’; tamaana melqughqwaaq perngughlluki eggnakesi ‘gather those feathers (that were stewn all over) and throw them away’	мыльқуҳқӱāқ
melqunge-	pos	IPA	to be fledged; to become covered with hair	No information given.	мыльқуңы-
melqupak	pos	IPA	shaggy or long-haired dog; arctic loon (Gavia arctica)	Qikmighaghhaghnguq melqupagraaghhaq tagiiq naken tamaaken. ‘A shaggy puppy came on the scene.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:208)	мыльқупак
melquq	pos	IPA	fur; feather; body hair	"melqwa or melqwi ‘its fur, its hair’"	мыльқуқ
melquvyaaq	pos	IPA	"fine, short or sparse hair"	#NAME?	мыльқувя̄қ
melquvzeghaq	pos	IPA	"fine, short or sparse hair"	#NAME?	мыльқувзыӷақ
melug-	pos	IPA	to suck; to smoke; to bite (of mosquito)	"melugtuq ‘he sucked, smoked’; melugaa ‘he smoked or sucked it’ / sugukelingiighem melugaa ‘the mosquito bit him (literally, sucked him (i.e., his blood)’)"	мылюг-
melugragh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly suck 	melugraghtuq ‘he kept sucking something’; melugraghaa ‘he kept sucking it’ /	мылюграӷ-
melugyaghqaq	pos	IPA	smoking tobacco	No information given.	мылюгяҳқақ
melugyaq	pos	IPA	jellyfish	said to be so called from the sucking action they make when touched	мылюгяқ
melyugraagh-	pos	IPA	to mutter	Chukotkan (R)	мыльюгрāӷ-
melyugraaq	pos	IPA	bad voice	Chukotkan (R)	мыльюгрāқ
memeghnaaq	pos	IPA	tree stump with roots	Chukotkan (R); = mimeghnaaq	мымыӷнāқ
meneq	pos	IPA	act of drinking	used in the ablative-modalis as indefinite object of the verb taaqe- ‘to finish’: Meghumalghii taagken.  Meneghmeng taaqluni tamaani yuvghiighluni esghapagluni aanumalghii. ‘Then he drank. After he finished drinking he went outside there to look and check on things.’ (KALLAG. 10); see also discussion of -neq1 in the postbase section	мынық
mengag-	pos	IPA	to make a vocal sound	Chukotkan (R)	мыңаг-
mengelgha	pos	IPA	noise of a lot of people together	"mengelghat nagaqughluki takwaaput ‘we heard a lot of people talking and we went to them’; neghuullghiit qerngaghllagmeng mengelghangat seghleghllaguuq ‘a large group was eating, and the noise they made was bad’"	мыңылӷа
mengelghate-	pos	IPA	"for people to talk in a way such that they cannot be understood due to distance, noice, etc."	naken mengelghataqat? ‘where is all the talking coming from?’	мыңылӷаты-
mengghaalugraagh-	pos	IPA	to babble (of baby); to mumble; to make non-speech vocal sounds	No information given.	мыңӷāлюгрāӷ-
mengghaalugraaq	pos	IPA	vocal but non-speech sound(s); babbling; mumbling	No information given.	мыңӷāлюгрāқ
menghu-	pos	IPA	to feel left out when one doesn’t receive anything from someone	"ellmi tuuneghinniluni menghuluni nengaamalghii ‘she thought she didn’t get anything, so she felt left out and stalked off’; ilangi yugem menghuketaghaqluteng ayuqut ‘some people are sensitive about being left out’"	мынӷу-
mengileg-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > mengilegnagh-, mengilegyagute-, mengilegyug-"	мыңилыг-
mengilegnagh-	pos	IPA	"to be such as to cause one to feel an obligation to act (especially, to render aid)"	No information given.	мыңилыгнаӷ-
mengilegyagute-	pos	IPA	to tire of being pestered by (him)	"Amenam aglaghluni, iitqiinaghluni anenghaghhani qinuyugtaa ughluvghaangliisqelluku, weni qinuyugtaa. Qenwat anengaghhaan mengilegyagulluku amenam yataaghqutuq. ‘Then she went home, and as soon as she came in she started pestering her brother to make a bow. Finally her brother got tired of being pestered and got ready (to make the bow).’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:204)"	мыңилыгьягуты-
mengilegyug-	pos	IPA	"to feel obliged (due to being cajoled, having one’s pity aroused, etc.) to act"	"ighneghhaghmi mengilegyugsatni maligtesqelluni qenwat qepghaqani peglluku pimalghii ‘when his son cajoled him, asking him (the father) to go with him, he (the father) finally left his work and did (as requested)’"	мыңӷилыгюг-
mengllagh-	pos	IPA	to melt snow or ice for water	mengllaghtuq ‘he melted snow or ice for water’; mengllaghaa ‘he melted it for water’ or ‘he melted snow or ice to make water for her’ /	мыңльяӷ-
mengqughtagh-	pos	IPA	to pop gum while chewing it	mengqughtafqaavek ‘stop popping your gum while you chew’	мыңқуҳтаӷ-
mengqughuute-	pos	IPA	to make a popping sound	mengqughuutuq ‘it made a popping sound’; mengqughuutaa ‘he made a popping sound with it’; ‘ he popped it’ /	мыңқуӷӯты-
mengquq1	pos	IPA	goose bump; feather stem on birdskin	mengqwi ‘his goose bumps’; leghlleq ghhiitaqaqa mengqughtupigtuq ‘the goose I plucked has a lot of feather stems’	мыңқуқ1
mengquq2	pos	IPA	popping sound	No information given.	мыңқуқ2
mengteghangwaaq	pos	IPA	cabin; seasonal house	Chukotkan (V&E)	мыңтыӷаңӱāқ
mengteghaq	pos	IPA	house	"Chukotkan primarily;  this term is used to refer to the traditional Chukchi-style Eskimo dome-shaped house with walrus skin cover held down with rock weights hanging from the edges , called ‘yaranga’ in Russian, or to a modern house, as opposed to the earlier semi-subterranean house, nenglu; the term mengteghapik is used to distinguish the traditional Chukchi style house from a modern house; Yugem pimakangi:  ""Aghnani ukughsi,  iightingnga. Maklawaaq tuquskumkun, mengteghaghpesinun aglaghllequsi."" ‘The man said to them, “You women, hide yourselves. When I kill the caterpillar you will all return to your houses.”’ (MATERIALY 444); = mangteghaq"	мыңтыӷақ
mengulghu-	pos	IPA	to speak quietly; to babble	Chukotkan (R)	мыңулӷу-
mengulghuuk	pos	IPA	hum	Chukotkan (R)	мыңулӷӯк
mengwaagtagh-	pos	IPA	to make vocal sounds repeatedly but intermitently	sangwaa mengwaagtaghta? ‘what is making those vocal sounds?’	мыңӱāхтаӷ-
mengwaagte-	pos	IPA	to hear vocal sounds repeatedly but intermitently	"nunavak uglaneghmini repall mengwaaglluni lliiqayuk ‘when a herd of walrus on ice is numerous, vocal sounds can be heard on and off’"	мыңӱāхты-
mengwaak	pos	IPA	moaning; groaning; vocal but non-speech sound(s); unintelligible voices heard in the distance	No information given.	мыңӱāк
mengyagh-	pos	IPA	to attract unwanted spirits especially from the ocean by making excessive noise	No information given.	мыңяӷ-
mengyaq	pos	IPA	unwanted spirit attracted by excessive noise	No information given.	мыңяқ
menqeqengeltagh-	pos	IPA	to crackle; to click	Chukotkan (R)	мыңқықыңыльтаӷ-
menutu-	pos	IPA	"to be forceful, loud, strong"	menutuuq ‘it was forceful’ / akuziiq menutuluni ‘he spoke loudly’; nuna aaghhaghtuq menutuluni ‘the earthquake was strong’	мынуту-
menutuqaq	pos	IPA	"loud sound (of knocking, shouting etc.)"	Chukotkan (R)	мынутуқақ
mepik	pos	IPA	good fresh water	No information given.	мыпик
meq	pos	IPA	water; ocean; vessel for melting snow for water (when used in dual); area of open water in pack ice; polynya	"meghqun ‘down to the ocean’; meghmi ‘in the water, in the ocean’; meghek (dual) ‘large vessel for melting snow for water or for storing water in the house; polynya; open area of water in pack ice’; Tawaten malleglutek mengunani kiyaghtuq. ‘It (the ice) would come in [to shore] and it would stay that way without there being any [open] water.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:154); see megh<e>- ‘to drink’, the verbal counterpart of the noun base"	мық
meqaq	pos	IPA	"hide that has been processed, usually be aging, to remove hair or fur"	meqaq akmagtangllaghnaken ‘make a bag out of the proccesed hide’; amiirameng meqameng nateghqaghqiisiin ‘do you have any proccessed hide for boot soles?	мықақ
meqe-	pos	IPA	to shed hair	mequq ‘it (area of skin)  shed’; meqaa ‘it (animal) shed’ /meqetaa ‘he removed the hair from it’	мықы-
Meqegtaq	pos	IPA	projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus toward east end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Мықыҳтақ
meqenghaq	pos	IPA	one that is or has become furless or hairless; bald person (slang)	meqenghaq yuuk tamaa kaasimaaq ‘a bald headed man has arrived’; amiiraq meqenghaq egsimaat ‘they threw away the furless sealskin’	мықынӷақ
meqesigh-	pos	IPA	to cause a skin to shed its hair by allowing it to age	No information given.	мықысиӷ-
meqete-	pos	IPA	to put one's lips together; to close one's mouth tightly	"Pugimaghnaqngama meqellunga meghmun qetgeghtunga. ‘When I was ready to swim, I put my lips together and jumped into the water.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 87); meqenneqesgsaghtuq ‘he kept his lips tightly shut’; meqetngwaaghtuq ‘he closed his mough tightly’"	мықыты-
meqlegh-	pos	IPA	to lack something; to be poor; to be short of something; to be in need of something	"sameng piyugnameng meqleghluteng anglikat ‘they were raised without having wanted things (i.e., popular toys)’"	мықльыӷ-
meqleqe-	pos	IPA	to lack (it); be in need of (it)	tamaana meqleqluku ayuqaat ‘they were in need of those things’	мықльықы-
meqralqagh-	pos	IPA	to be partially furless; to have bald spots	amiiraq una meqralqaghtupigta ‘this seal skin has a lot of bald spots’; meqralqiisaqumi piniimayaghta ‘if it didn’t have bald spots it would’ve been good’	мықшальқаӷ-
meqralqaq	pos	IPA	bald spot(s)	meqralqaa ilaaghluku enan pinaken ‘just patch the bald spots (of the skin)’	мықшальқақ
meqsaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to go quench one's thirst	meqsaghtughtuq ‘he went for water to drink’	мықсяҳтуӷ-
meqsug-	pos	IPA	to be thirsty	meqsugtuq ‘he's thirsty’ /	мықсюг-
meraaghinaq	pos	IPA	open water; nothing but water	"meghek uqlightekagka saallgaak meraaghinaatalghiik ‘the place where I was hunting had nothing but water, but ice formed on it’; meraaghinaghmi aghvengut ‘they caught a whale in open water’"	мырāӷинақ
Meregta	pos	IPA	Maruwtu Point site on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 7 in Appendices	Мырыхта
Meregtemmii(t) 	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Мырыхтымьӣ(т)
mesagh-	pos	IPA	to dip something (food) into oil or the like	Chukotkan (R)	мысяӷ-
mesak	pos	IPA	bog	"mesagtuuq ‘it is boggy, swampy’"	мысяк
mesamsug-	pos	IPA	to snack; to nibble	mesamsugtuq ‘he nibbled’	мысямсюг-
mesaqaaghaq* 	pos	IPA	snow bunting (Plectrophenax nivalis); white wagtail (Motacilla alba)	"more generally, any small bird or chick; Kingugmeng qerngughtiikut mesaqaaghaghnun neghesaghqameng. ‘We gathered worms for feeding to the little birds.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 100)"	мысяқāӷақ
mesaqe-	pos	IPA	to smack with the lips; to smack feet or the like on wet surface	No information given.	мысяқы-
mesaqegtagh-	pos	IPA	to make a smacking sound with the feet in mud	No information given.	мысяқыхтаӷ-
"mesigha-, mesighagh-"	pos	IPA	to deny one's guilt; to deny doing what one really did do	mesighaaq or mesighaghtuq ‘he denied doing what he did’ / mesighakaa ‘he denied doing it’	"мысиӷа-, мысиӷаӷ-"
mesiigh-1	pos	IPA	"to dip food into oil preparatory to eating it; to eat, dipping the food into oil first"	mesiightuq ‘he dipped food into oil (and ate it)’; mesiighaa ‘he dipped it into oil (and ate it)’ /	мысӣӷ-1
mesiigh-2	pos	IPA	to remove liquid from (it)	mesiighaa ‘he removed the liquid from it’ / 	мысӣӷ-2
mesiighqe-	pos	IPA	to oil; to get oily; to get or put oil on	"mesiighquq ‘he got oily, or put oil on himself’; mesiighqaa ‘he put oil on it, oiled it’ /"	мысӣҳқы-
mesiighqusiq	pos	IPA	kerosene	No information given.	мысӣҳқусиқ
mesiighquute-	pos	IPA	to cook in oil; to drop into oil	Chukotkan (R)	мысӣҳқӯтақā
mesiilghutaq	pos	IPA	vessel for holding or storing oil; gas can; oil can	No information given.	мысӣлӷутак
mesiinae	pos	IPA	sewing machine; machine	kakiiquq mesiinekun ‘she is sewing with a sewing machine’	мысӣнаы
mesiipik	pos	IPA	seal oil	No information given.	мысӣпик
mesiiq	pos	IPA	oil; oil dip for food	mesiighrugnilnguq ‘greasy food’; mesiingllaghtuq he's making oil from solid fat’	мысӣқ
mesughsugni-	pos	IPA	to be a clear liquid	No information given.	мысюҳсюгни-
mesughtuqaq	pos	IPA	something with a high liquid content	No information given.	мысюҳтуқақ
mesughtuqe-	pos	IPA	to ooze or run (of a sore or cut)	No information given.	мысюҳтуқы-
mesugusugnagh-	pos	IPA	to be swampy	Chukoktan (R)	мысюгусюгнаӷ-
mesunge-	pos	IPA	to get wet; to get soaked	mesunguq ‘it got wet (as from rain)’ /	мысюңы-
mesungesak	pos	IPA	killer whale; orca (Orcinus orca)	No information given.	мысюңысяк
mesungleqe-	pos	IPA	to get thoroughly soaked	= mesungteqe-	мысюңлықы-
mesungteqe-	pos	IPA	to get thoroughly soaked	= mesungleqe-	мысюңтықы-
mesuq	pos	IPA	liquid; juice; water in marshland; wetness on clothing	"mesughtuuq ‘it is juicy, wet through and through’; Nunivak paga mesughllaguuq eslallugem kingunganeng. ‘The tundra up there is full of water after the rain.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 98)"	мысюқ
mesuuna	pos	IPA	comb; hairbrush (by extension)	"also used in the plural, mesuunat, for one comb"	мысю̄на
mesuuna-	pos	IPA	to comb the hair; to brush the hair (by extension)	"mesuunaaq ‘he combed his (own) hair’; mesuunaa ‘he combed his (another's) hair’ / Fast-eneghpeni aghmigaqillu mesuunaaqillu, ilagpenun nallukesqelluku fast-ellghen. ‘When you fast, wash your face and comb your hair and don’t let your fellows know that you are fasting.’ (Matthew 6.17-18)"	мысю̄на-
mesuunavak	pos	IPA	large ice pick	"used in the plural, mesuunavaget, for one pick"	мысю̄наваы
metagh-	pos	IPA	to smother	No information given.	мытаӷ-
meteghlluk	pos	IPA	common raven (Corvus corax)	"Meteghllugllagnguq taana estaaghaamalghii. ‘That big raven was out sliding on the snow.’ (KALLAG. 17);  Ungipaghaninguq imani meteghlluget, anipat qateperewaaghuyalghiit.  Anipankuk meteghllugenkuk piniqutepigsalghiik, quunpeng qerngaghmetaqelghiik. ‘In the story it is said that back then ravens and owls were white in color. The owl and the raven were friends, always staying with each other.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222)cf. metghaq"	мытыҳльюк
meteghyaq	pos	IPA	eyebrow; eyebrow hair; partition on a seal-oil lamp	meteghyanka ‘my eyebrows’	мытыӷьяқ
metenge-	pos	IPA	to suddenly fly up; to suddenly ascend	"anipam qawaak naluguma akuqaghluku metengaghaghtuq ‘the owl  grabbed a landed bird and suddenly flew upward’; tengegkayuk nalugnaqsaghluni metenguq quulmun ‘the airplane was going to land, but it suddenly ascended’"	мытыңы-
metengqe-	pos	IPA	to be too big to fit (garment); to not fit (garment) because it is too small; to outgrow (garment)	mekelghiighem atkuni metengqaa ‘the boy outgrew his parka’; aatkani metengqelluki lliighii angliyalghiimi ‘he can’t fit his clothes anymore because he has grown’	мытыңқы-
metengtaq	pos	IPA	dorsal fin	No information given.	мытыңтақ
metghaghrak	pos	IPA	a certain edible plant that grows in sandy soil (Honckenya or Arenaria peploides); oysterleafs (Mertensia maritime)	Chukotkan (R)	мытҳаӷрак
"metghaq, metghapik"	pos	IPA	common eider (Somateria mollissima) ; parka made of eider skin with feathers	cf. meteghlluk	"мытҳақ, мытҳапик"
metghiq	pos	IPA	type of stitch	exact identification undetermined	мытҳиқ
metigh-	pos	IPA	to make a sly remark	No information given.	мытиӷ-
metngaamsiig-	pos	IPA	to hop around (of bird or person)	metngaamsiigtuq ‘he or it is hopping around’ / cf. metngegh-	мытңьāмсӣг-
metngegh-1	pos	IPA	to steal away; to kidnap	metngeghtuq ‘he stole away’ / metngeghtestaa ‘he caused her to leave without telling anyone’; metngeqaghvikaa ‘he stole a quick visit to her’	мытңьыӷ-1
metngegh-2	pos	IPA	to leap; to jump; spring up	metngeghtuq ‘he or it sprung up’	мытңьыӷ-2
metngeghute-	pos	IPA	to kidnap; to run off or steal away taking (him/it)	"metngeghutaa ‘he stole away with it; kidnapped him’ / Tannget metngeghutkaat, igleghtengngiinaamaluku qenwat upenghaamalghii. ‘The nomads stole him away, kidnapped him, and they were still traveling in springtime.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 77)"	мытңьыӷуты-
metngeqagh-	pos	IPA	to jump quickly or far	"Quyillegni qepghaghluni, qepghaghluni aghyuqsami metngeqaqruguftuq. ‘He worked for the Chukchi, and as he worked when he became homesick, he made his escape.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:124)"	мытңьықаӷ-
metughi-	pos	IPA	to get louder	metughiiq 'it got louder'	мытуӷи-
mevliighqe-	pos	IPA	to speak loudly and/or unintelligibly due to anger; to speak angrily with a raised voice	sameng taana mevliighqaqa? ‘what is he speaking angrily about?’; tazingkuk esgha sameng mevliighqullghiik ‘those two over there are speaking loudly at each other’	мывлӣҳқы-
mezighqumangilnguq*	pos	IPA	"one who is sloppy, untidy"	Chukotkan (R)	мызиҳқумаңилңуқ
mighu-	pos	IPA	unappetizing	emotional root; mighukaa ‘he finds it unappetizing’; mighuyugtuq ‘he finds something unappetizing’; mighunaghtuq ‘it is unappetizing’; mighuyuglunga neghenghitunga ‘I didn’t eat because I found the food unappetizing’ ; qawaagmeng aghipaan neghelghiit mighuyugtaatnga ‘watching them eating eat raw bird “grossed me out”’	миӷу-
mighyagh-	pos	IPA	to vomit	"mighyaghtuq ‘he vomited’; mighyaghaa ‘he vomited it out, or vomited on it’ / mighyaghnaghtuq ‘it makes one vomit or want to vomit’; mighyaghyugtuq ‘he feels nauseated’"	миӷьяӷ-
mighyasnguyug-	pos	IPA	to feel nauseated	mighyasnguyugtuq ‘he feels nauseated’ / 	миӷьясңьуюг-
mighyasnguyuk	pos	IPA	nausea	No information given.	миӷьясңьуюк
mighyastaq	pos	IPA	one with a weak stomach	No information given.	миӷьястақ
miglegrungiq	pos	IPA	young female tusked walrus with calf	cf. meke-; = minglegruniiq	миглыгруңиқ
miigh-	pos	IPA	to melt snow or ice for water	miightuq ‘he melted snow or ice’; miighaa ‘he melted it’ / cf. meq	мӣӷ-
miigtagh-	pos	IPA	"to make pounding, booming, knocking or thudding noise"	Aqlaghaghhneghaniqun mangteghat saaqelghiit miigtaghaqelghiit wetngaaqwaaqelghiit aqlaghami. ‘Whenever it got cold the houses would make a thudding noise and creak in the cold.’  (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:260)	мӣхтаӷ-
miigte-	pos	IPA	"to hold a drumming, singing and dance session in a newly completed house"	taakunnguq miignaqut ‘they say those people are going to hold a drumming singing and dance session in their new house’	мӣхты-
miiguute-	pos	IPA	to bang; to tap; to pound (not with hand)	"Iiwen unugaqaa qakma miiguutuq. Kii, ilutmun aneghsalghiimi, uka qagit iteghtut taghyut. Qagighllagaat, nenglu eslemkaghaghtaat, …. ‘Just when night came there was pounding out there. Gee, when he tried to breathe, the sea waves came in. Big waves came into it and filled the house, ….’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:16)"	мӣгӯты-
miik	pos	IPA	"loud noise, like thunder"	No information given.	мӣк
miikevleghaq	pos	IPA	faint or distant noise	No information given.	мӣкывлыӷақ
miinglun	pos	IPA	wall	Nunivagem tungangani nenglumi miinglutanga qelpeghsimakanga. Awergha nusugraamakanga. ‘Then she uncovered the wall on the side of the semi-subterranean house facing the tundra. She pulled out furs.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. 1:26)	мӣңлюн
miisigh-	pos	IPA	to soak	miisightuq ‘he soaked something’; miisighaa ‘he soaked it’ /	мӣсиӷ-
miisiisiq	pos	IPA	vessel for soaking things	"used in the dual, miisiisik, for one such vessel"	мӣсӣсиқ
miita	pos	IPA	this time act differently; for a change	Chukotkan; particle; cf.  emta	мӣта
miitalgi	pos	IPA	without fail; certainly; as expected	Chukotkan (R); particle	мӣталги
miite-1	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root;  > miisigh-, miitghutaq; cf. meq"	мӣты-1
miite-2	pos	IPA	to follow one’s husband around as he engages in a certain ritual after catching a whale	No information given.	мӣты-2
miitghutaq	pos	IPA	vessel for soaking things	No information given.	мӣтҳутақ
miiwen	pos	IPA	maybe	"Chukotkan; particle; Aliighwaaghaa miiwen tengegkayuget tagillequt. ‘The weather is very clear so maybe the airplane will come.’ (Akiingqwagh. 114); Aghtughluku tuqlughaghaataneghmeng miiwen sivumeggni atghaamanayukan aghnaghaat mengteghamun atghaamalghiit. ‘When they had no success in calling her, they thought she might have gone ahead of them, so the girls went toward home.’ (UNGIPAGHAH. 150) "	мӣӱын
miksagaghpak	pos	IPA	four year old bull walrus	No information given.	миксягаҳпак
miksagaq	pos	IPA	two year old bull walrus	cf. meke-	миксягақ
mileg-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > milegmiqe-, milegnatun, milegtaagh-"	милыг-
milegmiqe-	pos	IPA	to be made sad; to make sad; to sadden	milegmiquq ‘he has been saddened by someone or something’; milegmiqaa ‘he or it made her feel sad’ / Nanevgaghllagem yaghlegi taghnughhaghhaak milegmiqaak. Ellngannguq uyvalalukek tuququmaftaak angayuqakek. ‘The old man made the children sad. He said that he’d killed their parents with sorcery.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 37)	милыгмиқы-
milegnatun	pos	IPA	causing sadness	particle	милыгнатун
milegtaagh-	pos	IPA	to feel sad; to be downhearted; to be depressed	"milegtaaghtuq ‘he feels sad, downhearted, depressed’ /"	милыхтāӷ-
milek	pos	IPA	patch on boot sole	Chukotkan (R)	милык
milugh-	pos	IPA	to throw something; to throw something at (him/it)	milughtuq ‘he threw something’; milughaa ‘he threw something at her or it’ / milughaa qikmiq uyghagmeng ‘he threw a rock at the dog’; miluutaa ‘he threw it somewhere’	милюӷ-
milughmig-	pos	IPA	"to throw things (especially, rocks) at (him/it)"	milughmigaa ‘he threw things at her’ /	милюӷмиг-
milughru	pos	IPA	the number nine (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	милюӷру
miluqutaq	pos	IPA	edible sea creature with tough skin and dark orange insides	said to be so called because it is thrown to the ground in order to kill it; exact identification undetermined; Miluqutat miluqutaqelghiini uniiqayuget. ‘This kind of sea creature when thrown down repeatedly becomes soft [dies and is edible].’ (SLI JR. DICT. 101)	милюқутақ
miluta	pos	IPA	first fall ice	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, milutek"	мулюта
miluusaghqaq	pos	IPA	offering (usually a piece of meat)	Chukotkan (R)	милю̄сяҳқақ
miluute-	pos	IPA	to throw (it)	miluutaa ‘he threw it’ / miluutaa uyghak qikmimun ‘he threw the rock at a dog’	милю̄ты-
miluyagaghpaghqu-	pos	IPA	to step with big strides (as in a certain competition)	"Yugem qawaagtani unguvaasaghluku meghmun ateghtestegpenaan malighqaghyaqminigu miluyagaghpaghquyalghiimi aga tugaa. ‘The man injured the bird he shot, and before it got to the water he stepped with big strides, so he was able to take it.’ (SULUWET 109)"	милюягаӷпаҳқу-
mimeghnaaq	pos	IPA	tree stump with roots	Chukotkan (R); = memeghnaaq	мимыӷнāқ
minagh-	pos	IPA	to bring food over to people in a different place	No information given.	минаӷ-
mineq	pos	IPA	scum	Chukotkan (R)	минық
mingilate-	pos	IPA	to scatter; to strew	mingilatut ‘they are scattered’; mingilatii ‘he scattered them’ / mingilatiiq ‘he scattered things’; cf. minglae	миңиляты-
mingite-	pos	IPA	to scatter; to strew	cf. mingilate-	миңиты-
minglae	pos	IPA	wall; fence; boundary; side of mountain at base; horizon	Naaygham minglengiighhaakun igleghutukut. ‘We walked along the side of the mountain.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 101); cf. mingllun	миңляы
minglegruniiq	pos	IPA	young female tusked walrus with calf	cf. meke-; = miglegrungiq	миңлыгрунӣқ
mingllegte-	pos	IPA	to tidy up; to straighten up	mingllegtuq ‘he tidied up’; mingllegtaa ‘he tidied it up’ / cf. mingla	миңльыхты-
mingllite-	pos	IPA	to put away	mingllitaa ‘he put it away’ / mingllitiiq ‘he put something away’; cf. mingla	миңльиты-
mingllu-	pos	IPA	to pile sod against the wall of house (as to insulate it); to insulate the wall(s)	"Mangteghat mingllulghiini, supugiitkayuget. ‘When sod is piled against the walls of a house, it cuts the draft.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 101); cf. mingla"	миңлью-
mingllun	pos	IPA	wall; fence; boundary	cf. minglae	миңльюн
mingug-	pos	IPA	to rub	mingugtuq ‘he rubbed himself (e.g. his eyes)’; mingugaa ‘he rubbed it’ / mingugutuq ‘he rubbed or brushed himself against something’; mingugiiq ‘he rubbed something’	миңуг-
mingughhu-	pos	IPA	to smear something onto (it); to get dirty	mingughhwaak tipelek sunameng ‘he smeared the table with dirt’; mingughhutaa suna tipelegnun ‘he smeared dirt all over the table’	миңуҳу-
mingugusiq	pos	IPA	washboard	"used in the dual, mingugusik, for one washboard"	миңугусиқ
mingwaagtuute-	pos	IPA	"to rub oneself on, in, or with something"	"Pangalwaaghluni, pangalwaaghluni, ufsughqutaqluni, mingwaagtuulluni anigukun pangalwaaghluni, … ‘He [wolf] ran around and ran around, shook himself, rubbed himself in the snow, and ran around some more, …’ (KALLAG. 21); cf. mingug-"	миңӱāхтӯты-
mitegha	pos	IPA	ochre; red dye stone	Chukotkan	митыӷа
mitghugh-	pos	IPA	to go somewhere but not return as expected; to promise to do something but not follow up on it	"aghvighluni mitghuqaaguq ‘he left (to the mainland) and hasn’t come back’; akeqlunga mitghughtuq ‘she promised me, but she didn’t make good on her promise’"	митҳуӷ-
"mitingae, mitiingae"	pos	IPA	meeting	No information given.	"митиңаы, митӣңаы"
mughaya-	pos	IPA	to walk through deep snow	mughayaaq ‘he walked through deep snow’ / cf. mughu-	муӷая-
mughayaneq	pos	IPA	deep soft snow	No information given.	муӷаянық
mughleg-	pos	IPA	to roll up with the ends inside; to hide by rolling up	"Chukotkan (R,V&E);  mughlegtuq ‘it rolled up; it hid by rolling up’ / mughlegtaa ‘he rolled it up tucking the ends inside’"	муӷлыг-
mughneq	pos	IPA	sealskin strip folded and sewn between sole and upper part of a skin-boot; welt	No information given.	муӷнық
mughniqaq*	pos	IPA	"high sealskin boot with hair side in, used in summer"	cf. mughneq	муӷниқақ
mughpagagh-	pos	IPA	to fall down while walking	Chukotkan (V&E)	муҳпагаӷ-
mughu-	pos	IPA	to take a step sinking into soft snow	mughuuq ‘he took a step into deep snow’/	муӷу-
mughugte-	pos	IPA	to take (it) away (as under the ice (of the water current))	"unangkani mughugsimanii peskuwaghulluni ‘he said that the current took his catch away under the ice’; kanaghluninguq mughugtevziimakanga ‘he stepped on slush ice and he almost got sucked under the ice by the current’; Kitum gguutnga mughugaghtekuvgu elpeklu gguten mughugaghsaghqaaguq. ‘If you take away someone’s tooth, your tooth too will be taken away. (“a tooth for a tooth”)’ (Matthew 5:38)"	муӷухты-
Mughugyik	pos	IPA	Booshu Camp on  Moghoweyik R.  on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Муӷугӥик
mughunniigh-	pos	IPA	to go hunting on the sea ice	mughunniightuq ‘he went hunting on the sea ice’ 	муӷуньӣӷ-
mughunniighta	pos	IPA	hunter on the sea ice	No information given.	муӷуньӣҳта
mughunniiq	pos	IPA	season or activity of hunting by traveling over the sea on	No information given.	муӷуньӣқ
mughute-	pos	IPA	to hunt on the sea ice	mughutuq ‘he hunted on the sea ice’ /	муӷуты-
mughuya-	pos	IPA	to walk through deep snow	mughuyaaq ‘he walked through deep snow’	муӷуя-
mughuyaneq	pos	IPA	deep snow	No information given.	муӷуяңық
mughyug-	pos	IPA	to submerge (of a seal) after poking its head out of the water	mughyugtuq ‘it submerged again’ /	муӷьюг-
mugu	pos	IPA	group of travelers in the distance; caravan seen in the distance	No information given.	мугу
mugu-	pos	IPA	to go away into the far distance; to move from place to place; for there to be a group of travelers in the distance	muguuq ‘he went away in the distance’ or ‘there is a group of travelers in the distance’	мугу-
mugurin	pos	IPA	track(s) of wandering reindeer herders	"Chukotkan (R); plural, muguritet, used for the tracks"	мугурин
mugutin	pos	IPA	gear necessary for travelling a long distance	Chukotkan (R)	мугутин
mulaagh-	pos	IPA	"to howl (of dogs, wolves, etc.); to roar"	"mulaaghtuq ‘it howled, roared’ /"	муля̄ӷ-
mulae	pos	IPA	nipple	No information given.	муляы
"mulu-, muluugh-"	pos	IPA	to tarry; to be gone for or to take a long time	muluuq or muluughtuq ‘he took a long time’ / muluughutaa ‘he kept it for a long time or worked on it for a long time’	"мулю-, мулю̄ӷ-"
mulunghituq	pos	IPA	before long	"essentially a particle; Mulunghituq Taykegergen esnameng taglaamalghii mengteghaminun. ‘Before long Taykegergen came up from the shore to his house.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20); Piniightaa mulunghituq, maaveklu tagiiqluni. ‘He recovered completely before long, and he would come here.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:46)"	мулюнӷитуқ
mumegh-	pos	IPA	to go sideways	Chukotkan (R)	мумыӷ-
mumeq	pos	IPA	drumstick (stick for beating a drum)	No information given.	мумық
mumig-	pos	IPA	turned over; translated	"postural root;  mumigtuq ‘he turned over’; mumigtaa ‘he turned it over, translated it’; mumigngaaq ‘it is turned over’"	мумиг-
mumigtelleq	pos	IPA	translation; act of turning over; something turned over	No information given.	мумихтыльық
mumigtisiq 	pos	IPA	spatula	No information given.	мумихтисиқ
muuga	pos	IPA	sweetness; sweets	Muugameng neghlunga gguusiqunga. ‘I ate some sweets and had a toothache.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 53)	мӯга
muugaghte-	pos	IPA	to become sweet	muugaghtuq ‘it got sweet’	мӯгаҳты-
muugate-	pos	IPA	to be sweet	muugatuq ‘it is sweet’ / muugalnguq ‘sweet thing’	мӯгаты-
muughpag-	pos	IPA	to flee under water (of sea mammal)	"maklak saamteggun muughpagtuq ‘the bearded seal fled under us’; muughpaglleghhii naghullegluku akuuraamaa ‘it was fleeing, and he harpooned it and caught it’"	мӱҳпаг-
muughpagte-	pos	IPA	to escape under the surface of the ocean (of sea mammal)	No information given.	мӯҳпахты-
muutaq	pos	IPA	material that someone has asked to have work done on	No information given.	мӯтақ
muute-	pos	IPA	to ask someone to do something about (it)	muutaa ‘he asked someone to do something about it’ / yugem atkuk muutaa kakisqelluku aghnamun ‘the man asked the woman to sew up the parka’	мӯты-
muutighvike-	pos	IPA	to ask (him) to do something	muutighvikaa ‘he asked her to do something’; = muutighvike-	мӯтиӷвикы-
muutivike-	pos	IPA	to ask (him) to do something	muutivikaa ‘he asked her to do something’ / yugem aghnaq muutivikaa ayapghaatanglliisqelluni ‘the man asked the woman to make him mittens’; = muutighvike-	мӯтивикы-
na	pos	IPA	no	(particle); = nakaa	на
na-	pos	IPA	to be where?	"used only with transitive (impersonal subject) interrogative endings: naagu? ‘where is it?, where is he?’; naaki? ‘where are they?’; naakek? ‘where are they2?’; cf. nani, naten"	на-
naa	pos	IPA	mother	"naaka ‘my mother’; naanga ‘his mother’; Maaten ilangani aghnaghaam naani pimakanga, ""Ataka, iiwen anengaanka ivaghyaghtughnayaqenka."" Naangan pimakanga, ""Iwerngaqun iflallequten."" ‘One time the girl said to her mother, “I’ll go search for my father and my brothers.” Her mother said to her, “But you’ll get lost.” (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 13); cf. anaana, enaangaay"	нā
naa-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root;  > naama-, naamakaghte-, naamake-, naate-"	нā-
naafqe-	pos	IPA	to break; to cause to break; to run make a break for it; for weather to become bad	naafquq ‘he made a break for it’ or ‘it (the weather) got bad’; naafqaa ‘he broke it’ / naafqiiq ‘he broke something’; tangyeghmigegka ifkaghlukek naafqagka ‘dropping my wristwatch I broke it’	нāфқы-
naafqemmi	pos	IPA	at the time of bad weather	essentially a particle	нāфқымьи
naafqii-	pos	IPA	to cause a disturbance	naafqiiguq ‘he caused a disturbance’	нāфқӣ-
naafte-	pos	IPA	to get stormy; for a blizzard to arise	naaftuq or naaftaa ‘it is getting stormy’	нāфты-
naaggute-	pos	IPA	to trip over something	No information given.	нāхуты-
naagh-	pos	IPA	to smell; to sniff; to kiss	"naaghtuq (or naaghutuq) ‘he smelled something’; naaghaa ‘he smelled it, kissed her’ / naaghutuk ‘they2 kissed’"	нāӷ-
naaghsagh-	pos	IPA	to ignite; to light	naaghsaghaa ‘he lit it’ /	нāҳсяӷ-
naaghsaq	pos	IPA	match (for lighing fire)	No information given.	нāҳсяқ
naaghte-	pos	IPA	to anesthetize with ether or the like	No information given.	нāҳты-
naaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to sniff; to smell an odor for a while	naaghwaaghtuq ‘he sniffed’; naaghwaaghaa ‘he sniffed it’ / Mesiighpagni meghnuutaqa naaghwaaneghmeng. ‘I am tired of smelling the odor of oil.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 109)	нāӷӱāӷ-
naagsagh-	pos	IPA	to target shoot	naagsaghtuq ‘he is target shooting’; naagsaghaa ‘he's target shooting with it (the gun)’ / naagsaghvikaa ‘he's target shooting at it’; cf. nakegh-	нāхсяӷ-
naagsaq	pos	IPA	target	No information given.	нāхсяқ
naagte-	pos	IPA	to stumble; to trip	naagtuq ‘he tripped’ / uyghagkun naagtuq ‘he tripped on a rock’; = aagte2-; cf. nakligh-	нāхты-
naagu	pos	IPA	where is it?; where is he/she?; somewhere	"naagu suflugaqa? ‘where is my gun?’; Kayngeghllagem pimakanga, ""Quyngiq qerngughsaghtughnaqaqa."" Taagken aviilluni, aviiteghllagluni iitghumalghii. Aapsimakanga nanevgam, ""Qayugham naagu?"" ‘The bear said to him, ""I am about to go gather the reindeer."" After being away for a long time, he came back inside. The old man asked him, ""So then, where is it (are they)?""’ (AYUM. UNGIP. III:15); Egllullgaaftuqlu taawa naagu suflugmeng ivaghnaghhaq. Tamaa copper-et, legan taakwavek suqlughlluki, wayameng sameng, wayaghtuftuqlu copper-meng tamaa. Sufluget taaqiit. ‘Evidentally it had a stove, and somewhere a stovepipe was to be sought. They bent copper (sheets) and wired (that is, wrapped) it with copper wire. They finished the stovepipe.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)"	нāгу
naakaghqaq	pos	IPA	"step, foster or adoptive mother"	No information given.	нāкаҳқақ
naakghite-	pos	IPA	to be a poor shot	No information given.	нāкӷиты-
naaknaaq	pos	IPA	"aunt, in the sense of one's uncle's wife; bad mother; stepmother through father's remarriage"	No information given.	нāкньāқ
naalkaq	pos	IPA	seat of pants	"used in the dual, naalkak, for the seat of one pair of pants"	нāлькаӷ
naalke-	pos	IPA	to find	naalkaa ‘he found it’ / naalkutuq ‘he found something’; naalkefikaa ‘he found something of his on her (she had stolen it)’; Iyegaategka iflakagka estugaghmeng naalkagka. ‘I found my eyeglasses that I’d lost at the store.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 104)	нāлькы-
naalkutaaq	pos	IPA	found thing	No information given.	нāлькутāқ
naalkute-	pos	IPA	to find something	naalkutuq ‘he found something’ /	нāлькуты-
Naalla	pos	IPA	north beach of Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Ня̄лья
naallghute-	pos	IPA	to fix or get fixed; to repair; to correct; to align or adjust	"naallghutuq ‘it’s gotten fixed’; naallghutaa ‘he fixed it, adjusted it’ /"	нāльҳуты-
naama-	pos	IPA	to be sufficient; to be enough	naamaaq ‘it is sufficient’ / qiipaghaghqaq naamaaq ‘there is enough parka material’	нāма-
naamakaghte-	pos	IPA	to get enough	Naamakaghtaqa kaviiq angyangnatkaghqastun. ‘I got enough fox (pelts) to buy a boat.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 104)	нāмакаҳты-
naamake-	pos	IPA	to fit into	naamakaa ‘he fits into it’/ atkuka naamakaqa ‘my parka fits me’ (literally: ‘I fit into my parka’)	нāмакы-
naamigte-	pos	IPA	to go as far as; to complete	"naamigtaa ‘he completed it’ or ‘he went as far as it’ /… piyaaluteng tuvaq naamiglluku, uteghmun qiivyalghiimeng, uyughaat aviituq. ‘… walking along they got to the shorefast ice, and when they went back home their brother was gone.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:12)"	нāмихты-
naange-	pos	IPA	to come to an end; to be all gone; to be consumed; to be finished; be used up	naanguq ‘it is all gone’ or ‘(it is) the end’ / naangtaa ‘he used it up’; naangutuq kufimeng ‘he is out of coffee’; naangyaghaq ‘the ending’; cf. naangquq	нāңы-
naangelleq	pos	IPA	residue	No information given.	нāңыльық
naanghaq	pos	IPA	fat (especially cow walrus); cow walrus blubber	cf. naangghaq	нāнӷақ
naangilnguq	pos	IPA	motherless child	No information given.	нāңилңуқ
naangneq	pos	IPA	leftover; end	naangnengunani ‘endlessly’	нāңнық
naangngwaaghaan	pos	IPA	swing for playing	"used in the dual, naangngwaaghhaatek, for one swing"	нāңьӱāӷāн
naangngwaaghagh-	pos	IPA	to swing at play	naangngwaaghaghtuq ‘he was swinging’; naangngwaaghaghtaa ‘he is swinging it’	нāңьӱāӷаӷ-
naangqiqe-	pos	IPA	to work on ivory	naangqiquq ‘he worked on ivory’ /	нāңқиқы-
naangqughtaq	pos	IPA	ivory piece on keel of boat	No information given.	нāңқуҳтақ
naangquq	pos	IPA	piece of ivory (hard part); tusk (hard part)	cf. naange-; Uunghat neghighluku naangqumeng tuugqelghiit. ‘Harpoons of times past had ivory points.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 105)	нāңқуқ
naanneghite-	pos	IPA	"to be nowhere else, but ... (in a certain place)"	No information given.	нāньыӷиты-
naanqaghqe-	pos	IPA	to pay off a debt	"asengemi nuughtellgha naanqaghqaa ‘he payed off his bills’; qelaneghpenang pikengegkuma naanqaghqennaaghamken ‘don’t get impatient, I will pay you off when I get the wherewithal’"	нāнқаҳқы-
naapniigh-	pos	IPA	to go trapping	Chukotkan; naapniightuq ‘he's going trapping’ /	нāпньӣӷ-
naapniighta	pos	IPA	trapper	Chukotkan	нāпньӣҳта
naapte-	pos	IPA	to catch with trap or net	naaptuq ‘he caught something; naaptaa he caught it’ / Negaghpagput akimigaq naapsimalghii amaghtumeng. ‘Our net caught fifteen humpback salmon.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 105); Naapta kaviiq esghaghaqa taawa unkusegpegun. ‘I saw a fox getting caught there in your trap.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 105)	нāпты-
naaqa	pos	IPA	small surf wave	Chukotkan (V&E)	нāқа
naaqaa-	pos	IPA	to smell (have a smell); emit an aroma	"Amik qelpeghngamaluku imaninguq sangwaa naaqaaluni neqniipiglleghhii aana. ‘The door being  open something there coming out, very delicous, had an aroma .’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 2)"	нāқā-
naarqaq	pos	IPA	scalp of animal including skin from face	No information given.	нāшқақ
naasaghagh-	pos	IPA	to estimate; to predict; to measure	No information given.	нāсяӷаӷ-
naasaghaq	pos	IPA	marker indicating something	siqineq naasaghaakun piituq ‘the sun rose in the direction indicated by his marker’; angyat naayghaq naasaghaqluku taglaghtut ‘the boat went home using the mountain as a marker’	нāсаӷақ
naasiigh-	pos	IPA	to taste; to experience	naasiightuq ‘he tasted something’; naasiighaa ‘he tasted it’ / naasiiqaghhu taana ugkem qayaa ‘taste that meat broth please’; naasiighutuq ‘he tasted or experienced it’; naasiighutuq kayum qayaaneng eslami gaaqameng ‘he tasted some broth from sculpin that had been boiled outdoors’; naasiighutuq tawatelngughmeng teghigniqelleghmeng alikegpenakek angayuqagni talwa ‘he  experienced that kind of enjoyment without fearing his parents' reaction’	нāсӣӷ-
naasqiqe-	pos	IPA	to have a headache	naasqiquq ‘he had or has a headache’ / naasqiqsagutuq ‘he started having a headache’; naasqiqnaghtuq ‘it causes headaches’	нāсқиқы-
naasqughiitaq	pos	IPA	headband	#NAME?	нāсқуӷӣтақ
naasqughlluk	pos	IPA	aged (for eating) fish head	No information given.	нāсқуҳльюк
naasquq	pos	IPA	head; leader	"naasqwa ‘his head’; Aawyaghllak, naasqughllaga uuknaghllaga kiiluugteghllakaq. ‘He had a blood clot; this side of his entire head was all covered with cuts.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:40)"	нāсқуқ
naasquvrak	pos	IPA	bowl; rounded container	Naasquvrak mesiighmeng imighaqa. ‘I filled the bowl with seal oil.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 106)	нāсқуврак
naate-	pos	IPA	to complete (bring up to full number); to be complete; to be sufficient	"naatuq ‘it is complete’; naataa ‘he completed it’ / qiipaghaghqaq naatuq ‘the parka material is complete, there is now sufficient parka material’; naatuqun ‘an addition which completes something’; asengeni naataa ‘he paid her debt in full’"	нāты-
naatghigh-	pos	IPA	for one's boot sole to wear out	naatghightuq ‘his sole wore out’ /	нāтҳиӷ-
naave-	pos	IPA	to break	naavuq ‘it broke’ / naavngaaq ‘it is broken’;	нāвы-
naavelleq	pos	IPA	ruin(s); broken piece(s)	"used in the plural, naavellghet, used for one ruin"	нāвыльық
naavghusaq	pos	IPA	item given in exchange for something	No information given.	нāвӷусяқ
naavghute-	pos	IPA	to exchange; to change or trade places	naavghutuk ‘they2 traded places’; naavghutaa ‘he exchanged it’ / naavghutaa angyani suflugalegnun ‘he exchanged his boat for guns’	нāвӷуты-
naavyigh-	pos	IPA	to become very tired	Enkaangam qamumun iknaqut naavyighyaghqaanghisimaghmeng ayuqut. ‘And so they were strong for hauling and they would not become tired out.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:78)	нāвӥиӷ-
naawaagh-	pos	IPA	to search around for something that’s not visible	"kalngagem asinganilnguut ghhuughet  kataguutkat kaguluki naaawaaghluki tugulaghii ‘he reached into the pile of bullets that were spilled under the hunting bag and gathered what he needed’; neghsaq kalevegkaq uunghameng naawaaghluku akuuraamakangat! ‘their seal sank so they tried harpooning it (not quite knowing where the seal is), and they caught onto it!’"	нāӱāӷ-
naayghaleketaaq	pos	IPA	small hill with large rocks	Chukotkan (R)	нāӥӷалыкытāқ
naayghaq	pos	IPA	mountain	No information given.	нāӥӷақ
Naayghaq	pos	IPA	Gambell or “Sevoukuk” Mountain	see Map 7 in Appendices	Нāӥӷақ
naayghiinaq	pos	IPA	northwest	No information given.	нāӥӷӣнақ
naayvagh-	pos	IPA	to freeze (of lakes)	No information given.	нāӥваӷ-
Naayvaghllak	pos	IPA	Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	"literally, ‘large lake’; see Map 5 in Appendices"	Нāваҳльяк
Naayvaghpak	pos	IPA	Niyrakpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Нāӥваҳпак
Naayvaghvik	pos	IPA	October	"literally, 'time of freezing of lakes'; also given in one source as September"	Нāӥваӷвик
Naayvam kangii	pos	IPA	site at western end of  Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Нāӥвам каңӣ
naayvaq	pos	IPA	lake	No information given.	нāӥвақ
Naayvaq1	pos	IPA	Nayvak Lake just west of Old Chaplino (Ungaziq) in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Нāӥвақ1
Naayvaq2	pos	IPA	Troutman Lake next to Gambell	see Map 2 in Appendices	Нāӥвақ2
naayviinaq	pos	IPA	south-southeast	questioned	нāӥвӣнақ
nae	pos	IPA	home; place; household; room of house; couple	neka ‘my home’; nenga ‘his home’; nenka ‘my household’; Nek unaaq kaasimaak tengegkayugkun. ‘The couple came by plane.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 118); Net tukuunka tallimaneng avaqutaqeftut. ‘The household I stayed with had five children.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 162)	наы
naflughqugh-	pos	IPA	to cut or disassemble at joint	naflughqughtuq ‘he made a cut at a joint’; naflughqughaa ‘he cut it at a joint’ / 	нафльюҳқуӷ-
nafluq	pos	IPA	joint; hinge; crack in ice	#NAME?	нафльюқ
nafqesghagh-	pos	IPA	to falsely accuse through gossip	"nafqesghaasimaat teglengaghniluku ‘they falsely said that he was a thief’; nafqesghaasimakangat pinghiteghngaan ‘they said that he did it, even though he didn’t do it’"	нафқысӷаӷ-
nafteghte-	pos	IPA	to attach; to list; to insert; to glue	Chukotkan (R); cf. neve-	нафтыҳты-
nafugh-	pos	IPA	to hurt for someone; to die of sadness (missing someone); to die of a broken heart	"nafughtuq ‘he hurt for someone’ or ‘he died of sadness, died of a broken heart’ / nafughnaghtuq ‘he/it is such as to make die die of a broken heart’; Kii aghnaghaghmi whanii, nafughnaghquten elngaatall, aqfaaqamken. ‘Listen girl, I cannot stand your suffering any longer; I’ve come to get you.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:248)"	нафуӷ-
nafuqe-	pos	IPA	to feel broken-hearted over (him/it)	"nafuqaa ‘he feels broken-hearted over him, or it’ /"	нафуқы-
nagaqugh-	pos	IPA	to hear; to understand	nagaqughtuq ‘he heard something’; nagaqughaa ‘he heard her’ /	нагақуӷ-
nagasugni-	pos	IPA	to eavesdrop; to watch for	nagasugniiq ‘he eavesdropped’; nagasugnii ‘he eavesdropped on her’ /	нагасюгни-
nagate-	pos	IPA	to listen	nagatuq ‘he is listened’; nagataa ‘he listened to her’ /	нагаты-
nagatusiq	pos	IPA	earphone; stethoscope	No information given.	нагатусиқ
naghaagh-	pos	IPA	to play	naghaaghtuq ‘he played’ / naghaaghutut ‘they played together’	наӷāӷ-
naghaaghun	pos	IPA	toy; plaything	No information given.	наӷāӷун
naghaaghutraaq	pos	IPA	cartoon	No information given.	наӷāӷутшāқ
naghaalgun	pos	IPA	playmate	naghaalgutka ‘my playmate’	наӷāлгун
naghigh-	pos	IPA	"to become slack (of rope or the like, or wind); to become loose; to die down (of wind)"	"naghightuq ‘it went slack’ / naghightaa ‘he made it slack, loosened it’"	наӷиӷ-
naghllug-	pos	IPA	head downwards	Chukotkan (R); postural root; naghllugmi ‘(it being) with head downwards’	наҳльюг-
naghpaghsigh-	pos	IPA	to engage in shamanistic activity in order to improve the weather	No information given.	наҳпаҳсиӷ-
naghpigh-	pos	IPA	to lasso	naghpighaa ‘he lassoed it’ /	наҳпиӷ-
naghpiin	pos	IPA	lasso	No information given.	наҳпӣн
naghpiitelek	pos	IPA	bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)with bright band over the “shoulder” area	Chukotkan (R)	наҳпитылык
naghquq	pos	IPA	rheumatism	Chukotkan (R); cf. naghqwaaq	наҳқуқ
naghqutkaq	pos	IPA	feed (for dogs or other animals)	Chukotkan (R); = neghqutkaq	наҳқуткақ
naghqwaaq	pos	IPA	bone; framing member (as of house)	Chukotkan (R); = neghqwaaq	наҳқӱāқ
naghrigte-	pos	IPA	to swipe one’s wetted finger under another’s nose as a gesture of scorn	"ayumiq ilateng ugumiyagunneghmegteki naghrigtaqiit ‘in the old days, when people were annoyed at other people, they’d wet their fingers and swipe it under the other’s noses’"	наӷрихты-
naghsaq	pos	IPA	seal	#NAME?	наҳсяқ
naghughaghte-	pos	IPA	to pass by quickly	No information given.	наӷуӷаҳты-
naghughte-	pos	IPA	to pass by	naghughtuq ‘he passed by’; naghughtaa ‘he passed by it or her’ / naghughtekan ‘when he passes by’; naghughutuk ‘they2 passed each other’; Pingayut aghveghet ketemteggun naghughtut. ‘Three whales passed by farther down in front of us.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 108)	наӷуҳты-
naghulleg-	pos	IPA	to harpoon	naghullegtuq ‘he harpooned something’; naghullgaa ‘he harpooned it’ /	наӷульыг-
naghullgun	pos	IPA	harpoon; harpoon rope	No information given.	наӷульхун
naghullgute-	pos	IPA	to dive into water; to plunge ahead; jump in	Mekelghiiq uyghagmeng meghmun naghullgulluni pugimuq. ‘The boy jumped from the rock into the water and swam.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 109)	наӷульхуты-
naghuseghaq	pos	IPA	hunting equipment	Chukotkan (R)	наӷусыӷақ
naghuya	pos	IPA	gull; seagull (Larus sp.)	No information given.	наӷуя
naghuyaaghaq*	pos	IPA	baby gull	No information given.	наӷуя̄ӷақ
naghuyapik	pos	IPA	glaucous gull (Larus hyperboreus)	No information given.	наӷуяпик
nagnaaqun	pos	IPA	fur trim around hem of parka	nagnaaqusighaa ‘she put trim on it’	нагнāқун
nagnegh-	pos	IPA	to go on without hesitating; to move on despite obstacles	nagneghtuq ‘he went right on ahead’ / nagneghutaa ‘he took it right on ahead’	нагныӷ-
nagneqagh-	pos	IPA	to go too far and be unable to stop in time	No information given.	нагнықаӷ-
nagneqe-	pos	IPA	to do more or go further than planned	No information given.	нагнықы-
nagsalghaq	pos	IPA	obstacle	"tumet keluliit maliglleghhiini nagsalghaghhiitut ‘when going on the trail that’s further inland, there are no obstacles (such as mud, rivers, etc.)’; nagsalghangunaan mamlegmi igleghtuq ‘he traveled at night where there were no obstacles’"	нахсялӷақ
nagtuqaghte-	pos	IPA	to button	nagtuqaghtuq ‘he buttoned himself’; nagtuqaghtaa ‘he buttoned it’ / nagtuqaghfik ‘button hole’	нахтуқаҳты-
nagtuqaq	pos	IPA	button	No information given.	нахтуқақ
nagu-	pos	IPA	"to grow (of plant life, whiskers, tumors, etc.)"	naguuq ‘it is growing’; nawaa ‘it is growing on it’ /	нагу-
nagun	pos	IPA	through where; which way	nagun igleghnaqsin? ‘which way are you traveling?’; look under nani	нагун
naguqaq	pos	IPA	female that had just given birth	naguqaq qikmighput ighnimalghii ‘our dog just gave birth’; naguqaq salin ukughisigatughnguq ‘the woman who just gave birth hasn’t moved to her husband’s home’; cf. nagu-	нагуқақ
naguqun	pos	IPA	female’s firstborn child	ukaaghita naguqutanga mekelghiiq pivakepigtaat ‘they really adore and care for their daughter-in-law’s first child’; cf. naguqaq	нагуқун
naguqun	pos	IPA	first conceived child (term used by a woman only)	No information given.	нагуқун
naguyaq	pos	IPA	unnatural growth; tumor	No information given.	нагуяқ
"nakaa, nakaan"	pos	IPA	no	"particle; = na; Nakaa, imatuq pilleqsinga, qepghaqaghllaguunga. ‘No, I don’t think I’ll go, I have lots of work to do.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 109)"	"накā, накāн"
nakaghlleq	pos	IPA	sea ice extending far out to a specific location	see item 99 on lst in Oozeva et al. 2004	накаҳльық
nakaghtaq	pos	IPA	foreign object; imported material	nakaghtaghlluggaghmeng qiipaghiighaanga ‘she made a snowshirt for me out of a prized piece of imported material’	накаҳтақ
nakaghya	pos	IPA	east; east wind; northeast	No information given.	накаӷья
nakaghyaaghte-	pos	IPA	for the wind to change direction and come from the east	nakaghyaaghtaa ‘the wind is turning’ /	накаӷья̄ҳты-
nakaghyigh-	pos	IPA	for there to be an east wind	nakaghyightuq ‘there is an east wind’	накаӷӥиӷ-
nakasugraaq	pos	IPA	light bulb	No information given.	накасюгрāқ
nakasugtaq	pos	IPA	float for net	No information given.	накасюхтақ
nakasuk	pos	IPA	bladder	cf. naki-	накасюк
nakasuwaaq	pos	IPA	light bulb; Japanese glass fishnet float found on beach	No information given.	накасюӱāқ
nakegh-	pos	IPA	to be an accurate shot; to shoot well	nakeghtuq ‘he shoots well’ /cf. naagsaq	накыӷ-
nakeghaq	pos	IPA	stick tied at the end of a fishnet and used to anchor it in place	negaghpagem inglunga nakeghaa ayemumalghii ‘one of the fishnet’s end sticks has broken in half’; nakeghighyaqleggiinaq taawa negaghpak ‘right there is a fishnet ready for sticks to be tied on the ends’	накыӷақ
nakeghsaan	pos	IPA	target	No information given.	накыҳся̄н
nakeghsaasiq	pos	IPA	target	No information given.	накыҳся̄сиқ
nakeghsagh-	pos	IPA	to target shoot	nakeghsaghtuq ‘he was target shooting’ /	накыҳсяӷ-
naken	pos	IPA	from where	naken pizin? ‘where did you come from?’; look under nani	накын
naki-	pos	IPA	to have a bladder infection	cf. nakasuk	наки-
nakimtaa-	pos	IPA	to be lost and run around in a panic	nakimtaaguq ‘he's lost and panicking’ /	накимтā-
nakligh-	pos	IPA	to trip (him); to cause to trip with one's foot	naklighaa ‘he tripped her’ / cf. naagte-	накльиӷ-
nakmi-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nakmiigh-, nakmike-, nakmikegkaq"	накмьи-
nakmiigh-	pos	IPA	to make a choice	nakmiightuq he made a choice /	накмьӣӷ-
nakmike-	pos	IPA	to choose	nakmikaa he chose it /	накмьикы-
nakmikegkaq	pos	IPA	chosen one	No information given.	накмьикыхкақ
nakmikuraagh-	pos	IPA	to be picky; to be choosy	"nakmiilghii, nakmikuraaghnaqluni avangituq, pinillghaneng pinaqneghmeng ‘when she was picking out which ones to take, she was too picky, so she didn’t get anything just because she wanted only the good ones’; nakmikuraafqaafsi tugulaatek nengighqengwaaqaagut ‘don’t be picky, just take some, they have already been divided up’"	накмьикурāӷ-
nakreg-	pos	IPA	to hook as with a gaff	= nekreg-	накшыг-
nakrek	pos	IPA	hook; gaff	#NAME?	накшык
nakugh-	pos	IPA	eyes crossed	postural root: nakughtuq ‘he crossed his eyes’; nakughngaaq ‘his eyes are crossed’	накуӷ-
nakughmete-	pos	IPA	to be cross-eyed	No information given.	накуӷмыты-
nalgelpeniin	pos	IPA	large bundle of skins	Chukotkan (R); estiimangestamun qaakiit qafsinat nalgelpeniitet ‘they put on a few large bundles of skins onto the cutter’	налгыльпынӣн
nalighmeng	pos	IPA	or	"conjunctive particle; Ilangani tamaakut piyaat yuget, tevrat, uqlighhutaqelghiit meghhaghni nalighmeng iighwilnguum kangitegkeni. ‘Some of the men are hunting by walking on the ice, looking out for seals, in the open water or on a cove of a large cake of ice.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:130); Maalghuguuk, nalighmeng pingayut allakullghiit sivunelget maani Sivuqami ramket. ‘Two or three clans here in St. Lawrence Is. have different backgrounds.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:204)"	налиӷмың
nalighneq	pos	IPA	some part or the other	Chukotkan (R)	налиӷнық
naliini	pos	IPA	or; either	particle; Chukotkan (R)	налӣни
naliq	pos	IPA	which?	can be used either as an appositive or as a selectional base: naliq qikmin qilugta? or naliit qikmivek qilugta? ‘which of your dogs barked?’; nalim qikmima qilugtaten? or naliita qikmima qilugtaten? ‘which of my dogs barked at you?’; cf. natu	налиқ
naliqegti-	pos	IPA	to be undecided on which to take; to have a difficult time choosing	"nunavaget ima ateghaatut guutestengngunateng naliqegtim ‘the herd of walrus dived into the water from ice before we had a chance to shoot on account of (us) being unsure which to shoot’; natmun pilleghqameng naliqegtilunga upuupeng pinghitunga ‘I wasn’t sure where to go, and so I didn’t go’"	налиқыхти-
"nalla, nallae"	pos	IPA	that which corresponds in time or space	nallangakun ‘through the time or space which corresponds to it’; nallangighaa ‘it is in line with it’	"налья, нальяы"
Nallae2	pos	IPA	North Beach at Gambell	Naalkun pama angyaput tamlagtut ‘our boat landed at North Beach’	Нальяы2
nallagh-	pos	IPA	to run into; to meet; to encounter	nallaghaa ‘he ran into him’ / Ungazighmiit angyiit nallaghaput taan’gani. ‘We ran into the boats from Chaplino out there.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 110)	нальяӷ-
nallangigh-	pos	IPA	to pay off bills; to direct something (e.g. gun) at something or someone; to move facing (against) something; to pay back	"nallangighaa ‘he paid it/him off, or back’Angyaghhaat nallangiitut esneghagnun. ‘The little boat is in line with the lagoon.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 110)"	нальяңиӷ-
nallavragh-	pos	IPA	to lose something; to forget where things are	"unangyaghluni nallavraghaa, qayughllagnguq nallunapigtuq ‘he caught a seal but he lost it, because it was difficult to see’; tumet naantulangi nallavraghluki iflangwaaghamalghii ‘he lost track of where the trail was and so he was lost’"	нальявраӷ-
"nallegha,  nalleq"	pos	IPA	too much!; too long!	"particle; Naangan qamaken pimakanga, “Sangwaa qakemna miigtaghta nalleq, kangsughsiin?” ‘He mother from in there said to him, “What is that making knocking noises too much out there, are you too big to fit in?” (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 14); Nallegha tawatenngam, qaa, qayumeng. ‘That’s too much, please, no mroe tea.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 110); Ilughaqa nalleghaghhaghmeng anglimaa! ‘My cousin has grown so tall!’ (SLI JR. DICT. 110)"	"нальыӷа, налььық"
nalleghaghhalek	pos	IPA	how big!; what a long time!	exclamatory particle	нальыӷаҳалык
nalleghiite-	pos	IPA	to occupy a large amount of time or space	"nalleghiituq ‘it has taken a long time, it is very big’ /"	нальыӷӣты-
"nallekevyeghagh-, nallekevzeghagh-"	pos	IPA	to act crazy	nallekevyeghaghtuq ‘he acted crazy’ / nallekevyeghaataa ‘he acted crazy over it’	"нальыкывӥыӷаӷ-, нальыкывзыӷаӷ-"
nalleqiiyaghute-	pos	IPA	to even up; to equalize	nalleqiiyaghutuq ‘he made something equal’; nalleqiiyaghutaa ‘he made it even’ /	нальықӣяӷуты-
nalleqliq*	pos	IPA	relative (kin)	No information given.	нальықльиқ
nallghusagh-	pos	IPA	to fix; to correct; to set straight	Enkaangam tawani mitiingemi nallghusaghaqa Sivuqaq unguvaviga qutem yugan. ‘And so there at the meeting I sought to clarify that St. Lawrence Is. was a land where people could live (well).’ (PANGEGH. 52)	нальҳусяӷ-
nallimsagh-	pos	IPA	to estimate; to determine	"sivuyagtem samanlluku aghveq nallimsaghluku aghveqaa ‘the striker guessed where the whale was underwater, and struck it’; Aqeftapagmeng nallimsaghluku Uuyneq tevyalghiinga akivaghquutkaniimalghiinga ‘I went from Aqeftapak hoping to get to Uuyneq, but I was little off to the south’"	нальимсаӷ-
nallu-	pos	IPA	"to be ignorant (due to lack of experience, immaturity, etc.); to be stupid; to lack common sense"	nalluuq ‘he is ignorant’ / Ilangi yugem nallupigtaqelghiit. ‘Some people are so stupid.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 111)	налью-
nalluke-	pos	IPA	to not know	nallukaa ‘he doesn't know it’ /	нальюкы-
nallukngwaagh-	pos	IPA	to lose awareness; to not completely know	No information given.	нальюкңӱāӷ-
nallunagh-	pos	IPA	to be difficult to know or perceive	nallunaghtuq ‘it is hard to understand’ / naayghat nullunaghtut umegneghmi ‘the mountains are hard to find in a blizzard’	нальюнаӷ-
nallunatun	pos	IPA	without certainty	particle	нальюнатун
nallungughte-	pos	IPA	to be incoherent; to be confused	nallungughtuq ‘he is incoherent’ /	нальюңуҳты-
nalluniigh-	pos	IPA	to mark so as to make easier to locate	"nalluniighaa ‘he marked it’ / Sazinga? Tagneghtestaghpenga; uyavaneng esghaghaqnaghaatnga ukazit, afsengaat. Natenngam ivaghiniighnaqsinga? Nalluniighutestaghpenga! ‘What did you do to me? You made me black; form afar hares and mice can see me. How am I going to hunt game? You have caused me to be marked such that I can be easily spotted.’ (AANGHHAQ 28)"	нальюнӣӷ-
nalluniilkutaq 	pos	IPA	marker	No information given.	нальюнӣлькутақ
nalluniite-	pos	IPA	to be easy to know or perceive; to be readily visible	naayghat aliineghmi ‘the mountains are easy to see on a clear day’	нальюнӣты-
nalluyagute-	pos	IPA	to be unable to comprehend; to lose (knowledge about) something	nalluyagutaa ‘he can't comprehend it’ /	нальюягуты-
nalluyug-	pos	IPA	to be unsure; to be in doubt	No information given.	нальююг-
nalluyugsaghaan	pos	IPA	riddle	No information given.	нальююхсяӷāн
nalluyuke-	pos	IPA	to doubt	nalluyukaa ‘he doubts it’ /	нальююкы-
nalpagh-	pos	IPA	to be very excited; to be elated	nalpaghtuq ‘he's very excited’ / angyalek nalpaghtuq aghvengluni ‘the boat captain is elated over catching a whale’	нальпаӷ-
nalpeghtugh-	pos	IPA	to feel one's way; to try to guess one’s location	nalpeghtughtuq ‘he felt or guessed his way’; nalpeghtughaa ‘he felt for it’ /	нальпыҳтуӷ-
nalpiqugh-	pos	IPA	to compare	Chukotkan (V&E)	нальпиқуӷ-
nalqigangite-	pos	IPA	to be careless; to be untidy (especially in housekeeping)	"nalqigangituq ‘he is careless, untidy’ / cf. nanqigte-"	нальқигаңиты-
nalqigtaq	pos	IPA	relative (kin); clansman	No information given.	нальқихтақ
nalqiiwhagh-	pos	IPA	to be careless; to do things any old way	"nalqiiwhaqak qamiyek mulunghituk naavuk ‘the sled (that was made) carelessly) didn’t last long, it broke’; ulimaani taayughqem nalqiiwhaghluki taqughaghtaghii ‘he was in a hurry, so he finished his carvings any old way’"	нальқӣӱхаӷ-
nalqiiwhaq	pos	IPA	careless person	No information given.	нальқӣхӱақ
nalqik	pos	IPA	one’s own	particle; elpesineng nalqik angyangnaqitek ‘try to get a boat of your own’; nalqik allgeghuteqaghlleghhiini pinightuq ‘to get something for one’s own use is good’	нальқик
nalqu	pos	IPA	relative (kin); fellow clan member; family member; community member	No information given.	нальқу
nalug-	pos	IPA	to land from the air	nalugtuq ‘it landed’; nalugaa ‘it landed on it’ / nalugumaaq ‘it has landed (and stayed put)’; tengegkayuget nalukaagut esnakun ‘the airpane landed on the shore’; Anipa napaqam nuvukrugakun nalugtuq. ‘An owl landed on top of the pole.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 109)	налюг-
nalughqutagh-	pos	IPA	to jump up and down; jump or hop around	qikmiq petugtaaq nalughqutaghluni qenwat iikutuq ‘the dog jumped up and down so much that it broke out of it’s leash’; ukazit nalughqutameng igleghnequt ‘rabbits get around pretty well by hopping’	налуҳқутаӷ-
nalugtaq	pos	IPA	decoy duck; duck used as decoy	No information given.	налюхтақ
nalugtiin	pos	IPA	bird decoy line	No information given.	налюхтӣн
nalugutaq	pos	IPA	dead bird used as a decoy	No information given.	налюгутақ
nalugute-1	pos	IPA	to jump across; to land with	"nalugutuq ‘he jumped across something’; nalugutaa ‘he jumped across it, landed carrying it’ / nalugutfikaa ‘he jumped across to it’"	налюгуты-1
nalugute-2	pos	IPA	to dive in (to the water)	nalugutuq ‘he dove in’/	налюгуты-2
nalugvik	pos	IPA	"airfield or airport; landing strip; place where birds, planes, etc., land"	"nalugvikaa ‘it landed on it’; Sighinek wata angliiquq, nekeftaqiit  nutaghat aangelghiit guygut, aanguq igaghviga, aghalighviga, nalugvilguuq vær’tolyot-mun. ‘(The town of) Sireniki grows more and more; they erect large new buildings; its school is large and also its clinic; it has a landing place for helicopters (vær’tolyot).’ (AANGHHAQ 153)"	налюгвик
naluumsigh-	pos	IPA	to hop about	No information given.	налю̄мсиӷ-
nampae	pos	IPA	number; numeral	No information given.	нампаы
nanaaghaq*	pos	IPA	polar bear cub	#NAME?	нанāӷақ
nanaaq	pos	IPA	polar bear skin with fur	nanaaghmeng kamiighnaqniiquq nuliighminun ‘he says that his wife will make him boots out of polar bear skin’; qimugsiqayuget neghighluku nanaaghmeng aqupiitiqayuget ‘long ago those who went by dog sled used polar bear skin as a mat’	нанāқ
nanevgagh-	pos	IPA	to grow old (of a man)	nanevgaghtuq or nanevgaghaa ‘he has grown or is growing old’ /	нанывгаӷ-
nanevgaghtaq	pos	IPA	father	No information given.	нанывгаҳтақ
nanevgaq	pos	IPA	old man	"Nanevgaaghtukung piniyugtegpenaamta. Ilangi qawaaget anglaminat, whangkutung aliitaqukung kiiginaghmi. ‘We2 are becoming old men without having any joy in life. Other birds are a delight to behold, but we can be seen readily only in summer.’ (AANGHHAQ 28)"	нанывгақ
nangaghalleq	pos	IPA	way of life; culture; personality; behavior; form; lore	"nangaghallghat Quutmiit whangkunneng allangughtaa whani kiyaghtaallemnni, taawa ‘the way of life of the Siberians (Chukotkan Yupik people) at this time is different from ours for certain’; aghnaghaam taam nangaghalleghqek atami nangaghallghegketun ayuquk elngaatall ‘that girl's personality certainly resembles her father's’; angyam taam nangaghallgha ulimanaken whanga ulimaamtun uutun ayuqekanighluku ‘make that boat's form similar to the one I made’; lion-em nangaghallghi kitim nangaghallghistun ayuqelghiit ‘a lion's behavior is similar to that of a domestic cat’"	наңаӷальық
nangaghneq	pos	IPA	way of life; culture; personality; behavior; form; lore	Sivuqam Nangaghnegha ‘the Lore of St. Lawrence Island’ (book series title)	наңаӷнық
nangaghte-	pos	IPA	to form a big snow-drift; to cover with snow	Chukotkan (R)	наңаҳты-
nangaqaghte-	pos	IPA	to go straight on through	No information given.	наңақаҳты-
nange-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nangaqaghte-, naange-, nangenqagh-, nangeteghugh-"	наңы-
nangenqagh-	pos	IPA	to take an unplanned side-trip or extension of a trip	Angyaneng uteghninghilkumta nangenqaamaninakefsikut Ungazimun. ‘If we don’t return from the boat hunting trip you should know that we have gone on to Chaplino (or to Chukotka in general).’ (SLI JR. DICT. 112)	наңынқаӷ-
nangeteghugh-	pos	IPA	to give up hope; to go to a place and continue on; to stay too long	"nangeteghughtuq ‘he gave up hope’ / nangeteghuutaa ‘he gave up hope for him or it’; telaanangalghiit kelutmun qiivluteng taaga nangeteghughtut ‘the sailboat turned toward land, and then continued sailing toward it’"	наңытыӷуӷ-
nanggha-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nangghalug-, nangghanaq"	наңӷа-
nanggha-	pos	IPA	interesting; exciting	"emotional root; nangghayugtuq ‘he is interesting in something, excited by something’; nangghanaghtuq ‘it is interesting’; nanghghanaq ‘interesting thing’; iviighennguq esgha nangghanalghiit ayumiq sama esnami uglaghluteng iglakgalegnguq ‘they say that whaling ceremonies with singing were very interesting long ago down at the beach’"	наңӷа-
nangghalug-; nangghayug-	pos	IPA	to feel excited; to be interested	No information given.	"наңӷалюг-, наңӷаюг-"
nangghaniite-	pos	IPA	to be uninteresting; to be boring	No information given.	наңӷанӣты-
nangghite-	pos	IPA	to be right; to be correct	Chukotkan	наңӷиты-
"nangghu-, nangghughi-"	pos	IPA	to disapprove of someone or something; to criticize someone or something; to denigrate someone through comparison with another	nangghuuq or nangghughiiq ‘he is criticizing someone or something’ /	"наңӷу-, наңӷуӷи-"
nangghuke-	pos	IPA	to criticize; to denigrate (him) through comparison; to disapprove of (him)	nangghukaa ‘he criticized it’/ yugem nangghukumakanga panigmi aghneghsaghtulleghqaa saaqwlimeggnun ‘the man disapproved of his daughter's decision to spend the day with their next door neighbor’	наңӷукы-
nanghiigh-	pos	IPA	to try; to test; to experience; to challenge	"nanghiightuq ‘he tried something’; nanghiighaa ‘he tried it’ / Ataasimeng aghneghmi naani qavaaluku nanghiighnaluni pugimameng pimalghii. ‘One day while his mother was sleeping he decide to try swimming.’ (QUNGLUK 17); Neghighluku nanghiighutaqelghiit kilgaani esghaatuuneghmeggni, allakutunneghmeggnillu. ‘Long ago men would challenge each other when they met in the wilderness especially if they were from different places.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 111); Wiin sivukluteng pikusinun maligsaaghulluteng unangniighmun piinliqayuget liitkayuget tawaten nanghiighluku mughunniiq. ‘In order to learn they would go out with those experienced in hunting on the ice and learn from them and thus they learned to hunt game by actually experiencing it.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:130); Sivuqam igleghneghani tamaakut aqelqat kaanneghata nanghiighyaghqaawaqelghiit, iknaqetulngi, sukatulngi. ‘According to the custom of Gambell whenever those visitors would arrive they would have trials concerning strength and speed.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:48)"	нанӷӣӷ-
nanghiiqu-	pos	IPA	to try to do something	nanghiiquuq ‘he tried to do something’; nanghiiqwaa ‘he tried to do something to it ‘/	нанӷӣқу-
nangigali-	pos	IPA	to start going or coming over to someone’s place much more often	sangami taana nangigalighllaguuq whangkunnun ‘I wonder why he is coming to our place more often now’	наңигали-
nanglii-	pos	IPA	to gaze (into the distance); to stare 	nangliiguq ‘he gazed (into the distance)’/ nangliitkaa ‘he gazed at it’; cf. nunii-	наңлӣ-
nangllagh-	pos	IPA	to cool off (of a person)	nangllaghtuq or nangllaghaa ‘he cooled off’ / cf. nenglek	наңльяӷ-
nangllaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to get a chill (of a person)	nangllaghaghsaqunang aanegkuvek ‘don't get a chill when you go out’	наңльяӷаҳты-
nangllaghaq	pos	IPA	edge of a harpoon’s tip;  blade cover	No information given.	наңльяӷақ
nangllaghqe-	pos	IPA	to open one's eyes very wide	nangllaghquq ‘he opened his eyes wide’ /	наңльяҳқы-
nanglleg-	pos	IPA	compassionate; feeling pity.	"emotional root; nangllegyugtuq ‘he feels pity or compassion’; nangllekaa or nangllegyukaa ‘he pities her, feels compassion toward her’; nangllegnaghtuq ‘he is pitiful’; nangllegtaghtuq ‘he is a compassionate person’"	наңльыг-
nangllegnaghhalek	pos	IPA	how pitiful!	exclamatory particle	наңльыгнаҳалык
nangllegnatun	pos	IPA	pitifully	adverbial particle	наңльыгнатун
nangllegsiisiq	pos	IPA	supplication; prayer	Aghveghmun tawavek nangllegsiisiq. ‘(It (the ceremony) was) a supplication in regard to (catching) whale.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:222)	наңльыхсӣсиқ
nangqalugpagte-	pos	IPA	to be alerted suddenly while doing something	"kelengayugem saam elpegyugem, qimugsighhaq igleghtekestaghngaaghmi qikmii nangqalugpagtaalluteng aygumun  qiifqaghulluku teghiighusimakangat ‘while the man was dog sledding something alerted his dogs and they ran towards the north’; unugmi taghnughhaat ilungani naghaalghiit tenglugtughluki nangqalugpagtaasimalghiit ‘while the children were playing at night, someone’s knocking alerted them’"	наңқалухпахты-
nangqwalek	pos	IPA	yellow-billed loon (Gavia adamsii)	cf. naangquq; Nangqwalget nunivagmi naayvaan esnengakun ighnikayuget. ‘Yellow-billed loons lay eggs in the tundra on the shore of the its lake.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 112)	наңқӱалык
nangrug-	pos	IPA	"to get rubbed, chafed or blistered; to long for someone; to get worn out"	nangrugtuq ‘it got chafed’ /	наңруг-
nangrughqe-	pos	IPA	to blister	nangrughquq ‘it blistered’; nangrughqaa ‘it made it blister’ /	наңруҳқы-
nangsagaq	pos	IPA	"male partner of male, from another clan, with whom one would cooperate and exchange wives"	No information given.	наңсягақ
nangughyug-	pos	IPA	to get lonely	Kingungitneng avaqutama nangughyugumaanga elngaatall. ‘After my children [left] I got very lonely.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 113)	наңуӷьюг-
Nangupagaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	наңупагаӷмӣ(т)
Nangupagaq	pos	IPA	site on the coast east of Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Наңупагақ
nangyagh-	pos	IPA	to wince; to hesitate; to fear	nangyaghtuq ‘he winced’ / nangyaghnaghtuq ‘it is dangerous’; nangyaghyugtuq ‘he is fearful’; nangyaghtaghtuq ‘he is always fearful’; nangyaqluku qaprak siku ateghvikengita ‘he felt that it was too risky to go on the moving ice so he didn't go on it’; nangyaamakanga ungipaanneghmeng nanevgaq qinuumsi yugneng meghmi pelighqelghiineng ‘he fears telling the sickly old man about the men who perished in the sea’	наңьяӷ-
nangyaghnaq	pos	IPA	danger	No information given.	наңьяӷнақ
nangyiigate-	pos	IPA	to be brave	nangyiigatuq ‘he is brave’ /	наңӥӣгаты-
nangyiite-	pos	IPA	to be brave	nangyiituq ‘he is brave’ /	наңӥӣты-
nangzeghaq*	pos	IPA	hard seal blubber	Nangzeghaat neqesghaaluteng piniraaghinaat. ‘The hard seal blubber is good for [fox] bait.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 113)	наңзыӷақ
nani 	pos	IPA	where?; when (at what specific time)?	"interrogative demonstrative adverb; navek ‘to where?’; natmun ‘toward where?’; naken ‘from where?’; nagun? ‘which way, through where?’; naanta? ‘where is it?’; cf. na-, naten"	нани
nanilghaq	pos	IPA	lamp stand	No information given.	нанилӷақ
naniq1	pos	IPA	oil lamp	No information given.	наниқ1
naniq2	pos	IPA	covered part of stern of boat	Chukotkan (R); cf. naniq1 and the possibility that an oil lamp was kept in this protected area of the boat	наниқ2
naniqetaq	pos	IPA	covering of stern of  boat	Chukotkan (R)	наниқытақ
nanivegyug-	pos	IPA	to feel like one is getting to one’s destination fast	"ullghitagnekun igleghsuwhaaghaqngami nanivegyugluni repall gginani saapegkaa ‘when he was first travelling on a snowmachine, he felt he was getting to where he has going so fast that he covered his face (in fear)’"	нанивыгьюг-
nanqek	pos	IPA	stomach of herbivorous animal	Chukotkan (R)	нанқык
nanqigte-	pos	IPA	to judge; to test	"cf. nalqiganite-; Nanqigtigpenasi ilagpesineng enkaam Kiyaghneghem nanqiggneghillisi, …. ‘Do not judge your fellows and God will not judge you, ….’ (Matthew 7.1)"	нанқихты-
nanqigtista	pos	IPA	judge	 … luuraq avutkistegpek tuunayukangaten nanqigtistemun. ‘… it may happen then that your accuser will turn you over to the judge.’ (Matthew 5.25)	нанқихтиста
nanqigtivik	pos	IPA	court	"Kitum avutkumakangaten seghletun pimaniluni, ilaliighaghhnaken aglaasimaluten nanqigtivigmun, …. ‘If someone accuses you of wrongdoing you should come to terms with him as you are going to court, ….’ (Matthew 5.25)"	нанқихтивик
nanugh-	pos	IPA	hanging lengthwise	postural root; nanughtuq ‘it is hanging lengthwise’; nunughtaa ‘he hung it lengthwise’; nanughngaaq ‘it is hung lengthwise’; atkuni qelghusimaa nanughtaghtesqelluku ‘he had his parka be hung lengthwise’; nanughngaan pinaken ‘hang it up lengthwise’	нануӷ-
nanughagh-	pos	IPA	to catch polar bear	No information given.	нануӷаӷ-
nanughaghtaq	pos	IPA	skin pants with special design on back worn only by strongest men	No information given.	нануӷаҳтақ
nanughhaghaq*	pos	IPA	polar bear (Ursus maritimus) cub	No information given.	нануҳаӷақ
nanughugtaagh-	pos	IPA	to be crouching; to crouch	nanughugtaaghtuq ‘he is crouching’ / 	нануӷухтāӷ-
nanuq*	pos	IPA	polar bear (Ursus maritimus)	"Nanuq igleghtaquq nunmaakw, sikut pakigaqluki, naaghwaaghumaghmi. ‘The polar bear moves slowly, pulling itself across the ice, sniffing as it goes.’ (AANGHHAQ 74)"	нануқ
napa-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > napagh-, napaqaq, napaqutaq, napataq, napaziiq, napakutaq, napaqiliq"	напа-
napaatagh-	pos	IPA	to signal with pole and flag	No information given.	напāтаӷ-
napaataq	pos	IPA	pole and flag for signaling during a hunt	No information given.	напāтақ
napagh-	pos	IPA	erect; upright	postural root; napaghtuq ‘it got erected’; napaghtaa ‘he erected it’;  napaghngaaq ‘it is erect’	напаӷ-
napaghpag-	pos	IPA	for one's hopes to rise; to straighten something quickly	napaghpagtuq ‘his hopes went up’ /	напаҳпаг-
napaghrakegte-	pos	IPA	to be upright and straight	napaghrakegtuq ‘it is upright’ /	напаӷракыхты-
napaghte-	pos	IPA	to begin celebrating	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	напаҳты-
napaghusaq	pos	IPA	prize given in a competion	No information given.	напаӷусяқ
napaghwiigh-	pos	IPA	to place a mast (on a ship)	Chukotkan (R)	напаӷӥӣӷ-
napaghyaq	pos	IPA	mast; pole; post	No information given.	напаӷьяқ
napaqaq	pos	IPA	pole on land	No information given.	напақақ
napaqiliq	pos	IPA	rock-throwing game played in a sitting position	No information given.	нарақилиқ
Napaqutaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Напақутаӷмӣ(т)
Napaqutaq	pos	IPA	former village on Yttygran Is. in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Напақутақ
"napaqutaq, napaqetaq"	pos	IPA	stake	No information given.	"напақутақ, напақытақ"
napataq	pos	IPA	pillar-like mass of ice on ice field; pillar; post	"used in the dual, napatak, for one such pillar-like ice mass; see item 35 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	напатақ
napaziiq	pos	IPA	stem of plant (especially mountain sorrel (Oxyria dignya) or dwarf fireweed (Epilobium latifolium))	No information given.	напазӣқ
napena	pos	IPA	soft wood	No information given.	напына
napi-	pos	IPA	to go hunting	napiiq ‘he went hunting’ /	напи-
napluq	pos	IPA	joint; hinge; crack in ice	Chukotkan; = naflu	напльюқ
napu1	pos	IPA	cross-piece of sled	No information given.	напу1
napu2	pos	IPA	bird-netting blind	No information given.	напу2
naqam	pos	IPA	but instead; such being the case; consequent to the fact that; in as much as	"particle; naqam aanaqunga upughanneghilkefsinga ‘consequently I'm leaving because you didn't make me feel welcome’; ; Naliq menutukan aliksaliisaghqaa taam. Qaatkesaliisaghqaa. Tawateteftuq.  Sameng naqam seghleliighmeng avangituq. ‘Whichever one that will be stronger, the other one will fear him. He will start obeying him. It is that way. Such being the case, there wasn’t any trouble.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:16); Elngaatall taakut piniqegkangat. Naqam avaqutiilnguk. Taawanginaq nulighqutiinalghiik. ‘They liked him very much. That being in as much as they had no children. They were just a man and wife.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 44)"	нақам
naqamalla	pos	IPA	lucky	particle; ilangit naqamalla ayveghaasimaat ‘the others are lucky they got walruses’	нақамальа
naqamill	pos	IPA	but instead; such being the case; consequently	particle	нақамиль
naqamllu	pos	IPA	even; it turns out	particle; ighivgaq naqamllu sukalluteng taaqumalghiit ‘it turns out that yesterday they quickly finished’	нақамлью
naqamwan	pos	IPA	okay then; very well	"particle; naqamwan tugunaketen qikminka, wiin iitghi ilunganun ‘very well, take my dogs, go inside for now’"	нақамӱан
naqenqaghqe-	pos	IPA	to be full (of the moon)	tanqiq naqenqaghquq ‘the moon is full’; Quunpeng tanqiq naqenqaghqenghani tungyupagllagaqaa. ‘Always whenever the moon is full there’s a very high tide.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 21)	нақынқаҳқы-
nara-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > narangigh-, naranghite-"	нара-
naranghigh-	pos	IPA	to come loose (of something  not securely fastened)	naranghightuq or naranghighaa ‘it came loose’ /	наранӷиӷ-
naranghite-	pos	IPA	to be loose (of something  not securely fastened)	naranghituq ‘it is loose’ /	наранӷиты-
naraqe-	pos	IPA	to figure out measurements; to prepare (by measuring)	No information given.	нарақы-
nasagh-	pos	IPA	to put on one's hood	nasaghtuq ‘he put on his hood’; nasaghaa ‘he put her hood on her’ /	насяӷ-
nasaghaq	pos	IPA	hood for travelling	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, nasaghak, for one hood"	насаӷақ
nasaghiitaq	pos	IPA	head scarf	No information given.	насяӷӣтақ
nasaghuk	pos	IPA	covering of frost or ice over rock jutting up from the water; frozen spray on rocks in or near ocean	seen in fall when spray freezes in the air but ocean is still largely ice-free; see item 36 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	насяӷук
nasallenguq	pos	IPA	Sabine's gull (Xema sabini)	No information given.	насяльыңуқ
nasaperalek	pos	IPA	brown-headed bird species	exact identification undetermined	насяпыралык
nasaperaq	pos	IPA	hat; cap	"Esghaghyaqufsiki Ungazighmiit aatkiit nuqutupaaghrugllaaguut, nasiilnguut nasaperameng nasaqelghiit. ‘You should have seen the Chaplinio people with their parkas without hoods open at the neck, haaving hats instead of hoods.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:198)"	насяпырақ
nasaq	pos	IPA	parka hood	Taagken Ukaamangatem nasani mataghsimakanga. Mataghsaqminigu gginaa yugem esghaamakanga. ‘Then Ukaamangan pulled back her parka hood. When she took it off the man saw her face.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 37)	насяқ
nasig-	pos	IPA	to cry after or for someone who is leaving (of a child who doesn't want to be left)	nasigtuq ‘he cried after someone’; nasigaa ‘he cried after or for her’ /	насиг-
nasigutaq	pos	IPA	stick with bulge on end	Chukotkan (R)	насигутақ
nasiigh-	pos	IPA	to pull the hood back from one's head	nasiightuq ‘he pulled back his hood’; nasiighaa ‘he pulled the hood back her head’ /	насӣӷ-
nasiqe-	pos	IPA	to take home as much as one wants or needs; to take enough	"nasiquq ‘he took home enough, as much as he wanted’ / neghsameng nasiquq ‘he took home enough seal(s)’"	насиқы-
nasiqun	pos	IPA	example	No information given.	насиқун
nasiqute-	pos	IPA	to set an example; to take or give enough;  approximate	nasiqutuq he took enough; nasiqutaa he gave her enough /	насиқуты-
"naspete-, naspeqe-"	pos	IPA	to estimate	naspetaa ‘he estimated it’ / naspeqaa atkugmun ‘he's estimating it for a parka’; naspequtaa qiipaghqaghhmeng ‘he's estimating the cloth for it’	"наспыты-, наспықы-"
Nasqaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Насқаӷмӣ(т)
Nasqaq	pos	IPA	Naskak Camp (site) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Насқақ
nasqillagute-	pos	IPA	to fall or slip and hit the ground with one’s head	"qiighnarewaaghmi qiighnilluni nasqillagutevziimalghii ‘he slipped on a slippery part and almost landed on his head’; nasqillagulluni kazivaallugmiqumalghii ‘he fell and landed on his head on the ground, and became dizzy’"	насқильагуты-
nasqinaaq	pos	IPA	stump of tree; tree trunk	found on the beach	насқинāқ
nasqugh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nasqillagute-, naasquq, nasqinaaq, nasqughiitaq, nasqughun, nasqumtaq, nasqunghrek"	насқуӷ-
nasqughiitaq	pos	IPA	headband; rope which fits over the head used in a certain gymnastic type activity	nasqughiitighluni tevyaaghsuggaaqaaguq ‘he started “going around the rope” (in the gymnastic type activity) by putting his head through the noose’	насқуӷӣтақ
nasqughun	pos	IPA	amulet worn over the head	Chukotkan (R)	насқуӷун
nasqumtaq	pos	IPA	arrowhead	Chukotkan (R)	насқумтақ
nasquneq	pos	IPA	walrus skull	"used in the dual, nasqunghek, for one skull"	насқунық
Nasqutaq	pos	IPA	site at embayment inside Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Насқутақ
nasughagh-	pos	IPA	to estimate; to predict	"nasughaghaat kaatelleghqaa maalghu aghneq ‘they predict his arrival to be in two days’; akemkut nasughalleghmeggni ighivgaqunnguq tanqiq tuqaanaquq ‘the people (from far away, from the mainland) predict there will be a lunar eclipse tonight’; cf. nasuqe-"	насуӷаӷ-
nasuqe-	pos	IPA	to measure; to judge; to estimate	nasuqaa ‘he estimated it’ / nasuqiiq ‘he estimated something’; nasuqellemni ‘in my judgment’; cf. nasughagh-	насюқы-
nasuqun	pos	IPA	example; pattern; model	Chukotkan (R)	насюқун
natae	pos	IPA	where (on possessor)	No information given.	натаы
nateghqaq	pos	IPA	sole of skin-boot	No information given.	натыҳқақ
natekeruugte-	pos	IPA	to get upset; to become critical of something	natekeruugtuq ‘he got upset’ / natekeruugngaaq ‘he is upset’	натыкырӯхты-
natelnguq*	pos	IPA	what kind	"natelnguq pinaqsigu? ‘what kind will you have, what kind will you do something to?’"	натылңуқ
natelnguunngam	pos	IPA	what kind then	particle	натылңӯнңам
naten	pos	IPA	how; which way; somehow	particle; naten kiyaghtaqsin? ‘how are you?’; naten ayuqaqa esla? ‘how is the weather?’; naten una ulimaazigu? ‘how did you make this?’	натын
natengiighhaq	pos	IPA	a little bit; slightly; temporarily	adverbial particle; … angerkavavleghaaguq natengiighhaq Unazighmiit anyaghpagitneng. ‘… it was a little bigger than the Chaplino people’s ship.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:14)	натыңя̄ҳақ
natenkaghte-	pos	IPA	to get how much	natenkaghta? ‘how much did he get?’; = natetkaghte-	натынкаҳты-
natentuq	pos	IPA	what if; I wonder if	particle	натынтуқ
nateq	pos	IPA	"entry or front outer room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.); lower level; floor; bottom part of a boat, mountain, etc."	"naatgha ‘its entry’; Sulpik iiwenllu naaygham naatghanun kaataquq naken sangwaa nagallaataghaa. ‘Just as Sulpik got to the foot of the mountain, he heard that strange voice again.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 53); Yugem qikmimi qaghlungi nateghqun agaghtii. ‘The man hung up his dag’s harness in the entry room.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 106)"	натық
nateqfagh-	pos	IPA	to descend; to go down to lower level	"tagituk quulvansaghluni nateqfaghtuq ‘the fog was high, but it is now descending’; mesiilghutakek egllum nateqfantepigtuk ‘the oil in the oil tank of the stove is low’"	натықфаӷ-
nateqfaq	pos	IPA	lower area	No information given.	иатықфақ
nateqlite-	pos	IPA	to reach the bottom	nateqlituq ‘he reached the bottom’	натықльиты-
natesengetaghhaq*	pos	IPA	just a tiny little bit	No information given.	натысыңытаҳақ
natesug-	pos	IPA	to be astonished; to feel uneasy	"natesugtuq ‘he feels uneasy’ / natesugnaghtuq ‘it makes one feel uneasy, is astonishing, out of the ordinary’; natesugtestaa ‘he made her feel uneasy’"	натысюг-
natesugnatun	pos	IPA	amazingly	No information given.	натысюгнатун
natete-	pos	IPA	to be which way; to be how; to be what kind	nateta? ‘what kind is it?’; nateskan ‘if it is like that’; cf. naten	натыты-
natetepigte-	pos	IPA	to be odd; to be different from others	natetepigtuq ‘he is odd’ /	натытыпихты-
natetkaghte-	pos	IPA	to get how much	natetkaghta? ‘how much did he get?’; = natenkaghte-	натыткаҳты-
natigh-	pos	IPA	to sew sole on boot	natightuq ‘he is sewing on a sole’; natighaa ‘he is sewing a sole onto it’ /	натиӷ-
natiin1	pos	IPA	heavy sinew thread used to sew sole onto a skin-boot	No information given.	натӣн1
natiin2	pos	IPA	floor; flooring	Chukotkan (R)	натӣн2
natiisigh-	pos	IPA	to lay a floor; to underpin; to make a foundation for	Chukotkan (R)	натӣсиӷ-
natiitngaaghek	pos	IPA	valley	Chukotkan (R); a dual	натӣтңьāӷык
natmun	pos	IPA	toward where	natmun pii? ‘toward where was he going?’; look under nani	натмьун
natu	pos	IPA	which one	"natu taghnughhaqsigu? ‘which one is your child?’; natu qikmiq piyugsigu? ‘which dog do you want?’; with interrogative endings the verb base natungaa- (underlyingly: natungau- ) from underlying expanded base *natungaq, is used rather than *natungu-; thus: natungaawa? ‘which one is it?’, cf. kina, sa; cf. naliq, naten"	нату
navaqaate-	pos	IPA	to be out of line (of tatoos)	No information given.	навақāты-
navegh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > navghagh-, navghiite-, naavghute-"	навыӷ-
navek	pos	IPA	to where	navek pinaqsin? ‘where are you going?’; look under nani	навык
naverugllak	pos	IPA	very far away	No information given.	навырухльяк
navghagh-	pos	IPA	to borrow	navghaghtuq ‘he borrowed something’; navghaghaa ‘he borrowed it’ / navghaasiq ‘something pawned or otherwise loaned out’	навӷаӷ-
navghiite-	pos	IPA	to lend	navghiitaa ‘he lent it’ /	навӷӣты-
nayak	pos	IPA	sister (older or younger) of male	No information given.	наяк
nayemte-	pos	IPA	to stretch out an inflated sea mammal intestine so it will dry straight	ighneghlluget ghhuughluki nayemtiki ‘blow air in to the intestines and stretch it out straight that way’; cf. ayeme-	наӥымты-
nayeqerregagh-	pos	IPA	to stay closeby	qepghaannaluni tamaa yuuk nayeqerregaataquq luuraq qepghaqalinnayukangisteng ‘the men are hanging around in case they get jobs’	наӥықышыгаӷ-
Nayghapaget	pos	IPA	Myghapowit Mtn. (and Niykhapakhit Lake) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Наӥӷапагыт
Nayghapak1	pos	IPA	small hill east on coast from Naskak Camp (Nasqaq)  on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices; cf. naayghaq ‘mountain’	Наӥӷапак1
Nayghapak2	pos	IPA	mountain behind Niyghapak Pt. at the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Наӥӷапак2
Nayghwaaq	pos	IPA	Mugum Peak on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Наӥӷӱāқ
nayiq	pos	IPA	hollow area under the surface of the ground or ice; crevice	"sigugneq sama ifkaannaghqwaamaa nayiighllagluni ayuquq ‘the ice edge is dangerous, one can fall off it because it is hollow’; Kayunnaghaquq iqanengenaaghmeng nayiitni taan’gani qalmesani. ‘One can catch sculpins, arctic (staghorn) sculpins, there in the reefs in their crevices.’ (AKINGQWAGH. 22); Anigulluglluni lliighyalghiimi taakut nayiita akeleghraagha meghaangluni, tamaaken meqegkat. ‘When the snow became soft, getting that way, the area in the middle of those crevices got water.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:120); cf. nayug-, and nayuq"	наӥиқ
nayug-	pos	IPA	to skin an animal (or an organ such as a stomach) starting at the mouth and doing it in such a way that the skin is not split	No information given.	наюг-
nayugh-	pos	IPA	to stay with; to tend; to watch over; to guard; to babysit	nayughaa ‘he is tending her’ / nayughiiq ‘he is tending someone’	наюӷ-
nayuq	pos	IPA	site; position	Chukotkan (R); questioned; cf. nayiq	наюқ
nayute-	pos	IPA	to close in around (of ice)	Chukotkan (R); sikum nayusimaa angyaghpak ‘the ice closed in around the ship’	наюты-
nayvagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nayvaghaq, naayvaq"	наӥваӷ-
Nayvaghaat	pos	IPA	lakes and ponds south of Troutman Lake next to Gambell; Ninivahut Lake and other nearby small lakes	"literally, ‘little lakes’; see Map 7 in Appendices"	Наӥваӷāт
nayvaghaq	pos	IPA	pond	No information given.	наӥваӷақ
nazi-	pos	IPA	to remove hair from and scrape reindeer skin	No information given.	нази-
nazigh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nazighaq, nazisungaq"	назиӷ-
Nazighaghsiq	pos	IPA	February	"literally, ‘time (?) of ring seals’; also given in various sources as January-February, February, February-March, March, and April"	Назиӷаҳсиқ
nazighaq	pos	IPA	long-haired ring seal (Phoca hispida)	No information given.	назиӷақ
nazikaq	pos	IPA	dehaired and scraped reindeer skin	cf. nazigh-	назикақ
nazisungaq	pos	IPA	short-haired ring seal (Phoca hispida)	No information given.	назисюңақ
nefkagh-	pos	IPA	to watch for a seal at its breathing hole	"Tamaana yuuk naghughqughluku awalighpigaaghllutek nefkaghaqelghiik. ‘But, instead of staying together with them, they went way ahead of the others and sigugneq sama ifkaannaghqwaamaa nayiighllagluni ayuquq ‘the ice edge is dangerous, one can fall off it because it is hollow’; Kayunnaghaquq iqanengenaaghmeng nayiitni taan’gani qalmesani. ‘One can catch sculpins, arctic (staghorn) sculpins, there in the reefs in their crevices.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 22)"	ныфкаӷ-
nefku	pos	IPA	meat hung outside to dry	No information given.	ныфку
nefku-	pos	IPA	to hang meat to dry	nefkuuq ‘he is hanging meat to dry’; nefkwaa ‘he is hanging it to dry’ /	ныфку-
nefkuli-	pos	IPA	to prepare meat for drying	nefkuliiq ‘he is preparing meat for drying’; nefkulii ‘he is preparing it’ /	ныфкули-
nefkutaq	pos	IPA	pole used to hang meat to dry	No information given.	ныфкутақ
nefkuuraq	pos	IPA	dried meat	No information given.	ныфкӯрақ
nefsukaghlleq	pos	IPA	slush ice temporarily stuck at edge of fast ice	cf. neve-	ныфсюкаҳльық
nefteghqe-	pos	IPA	to assemble; to put together	nefteghquq ‘he assembled something’; nefteghqaa ‘he assembled it’ / kakisik nefteghqughaak ‘he put the sewing machine together’	ныфтыҳқы-
neftegte-	pos	IPA	to fasten; to hang up; to put in place	"neftegtaa ‘he fastened it, put it in place’ / Igaqegkanka minglekun neftegtanka. ‘I put my pictures on the wall.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 116); cf. neve-"	ныфтыхты-
negagh-	pos	IPA	to snare	No information given.	ныгаӷ-
negaghaq	pos	IPA	snare made of baleen for catching ducks	No information given.	ныгаӷақ
negaghpak	pos	IPA	fishnet	No information given.	ныгаҳпак
negaghpawaaq	pos	IPA	grating (or lattice) inside (under?) kettle	Chukotkan (R)	ныгаҳпаӱāқ
negaq	pos	IPA	snare; bird snare	No information given.	ныгақ
negeve-	pos	IPA	rip open (of seam)	puvitangi negevaghaghsimalghiit ilamineng pilluwaghluni ‘the ruff on his hood ripped open when he fought with his friend’	ныгывы-
negh<e>-	pos	IPA	to eat	neghtuq ‘he ate’; neghaa ‘he is eating it’ / sameng neghsin? ‘what did you eat?’; neghaquq ‘he is eating; he eats’; neghellequq ‘he will eat’; neghegkan ‘when he eats’; neghelta ‘let’s eat’; neghefqiita ‘don’t eat them’; in some respects this base acts as if it were negh- (as in the examples with neghtuq and neghsin above) while in other respects it acts as if it were neghe- ; cf. megh<e>; cf. neneq	ныӷ(ы)-
neghaali-	pos	IPA	"to slow or die down (of person, event, occurrence, etc.)"	"eslallugiisan kiiwem maaqelleghqek neghaaliik ‘when there wasn’t any more rain, the flow of the river slowed down’; qepghalghiit neghaalingigatngwaaghtut ‘those working haven’t slowed down at all’"	ныӷāли-
neghagte-	pos	IPA	to drain (overly full lake going down)	"naayvam sikunga suflughragtekuni neghaglleqaa ‘when the ice in the lake melts, it will drain out’; naayvat neghagtaqii ‘the lakes are draining out’"	ныӷахты-
neghesta	pos	IPA	parasite	Chukotkan (R); = neghista	ныӷыста
Neghesti	pos	IPA	Thanksgiving (holiday)	Neghestimi tamaghhaghmi neqenghaghqegkayuk. ‘On Thanksgiving Day everyone feasted.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 123)	Ныӷысти
neghigh-	pos	IPA	to have happened long ago	"used mainly with transitive subordinative endings; neghighluku piiqsalghiikut ‘a long time ago we used to do this’; Iteghyaghaam  Anagutaghmun  neghighluku  apellgha ‘told long ago by Iteghyaghaq to Anagutaq’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222); Neghighluku sangwaat yuget naken kaaanneghata maakumiingungilnguut aqelqat. Sivuqam igleghneghani tamaakut aqelqat kaanneghata nangiighyaghqaawaqelghiit, iknaqetulngi, sukatulngi. ‘Long ago whenever some people from anywhere, not local people, they were visitors. In accordance with the custom of Gambell when they arrived there would be competions concerning strength and speed.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:48)"	ныӷиӷ-
neghightaq	pos	IPA	something or someone that goes way back; thing from long ago	"Nakaa, nekaqa una neghightaagunga una nekaqa whanga. ‘No, It’s my house; I am someone that has gone away, but this is my house, mine.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:266)"	ныӷиҳтақ
neghista	pos	IPA	parasite	Chukotkan (R);  = neghesta	ныӷиста
neghllugh-	pos	IPA	to fall over head first; to topple over	neghllughtuq ‘he or it fell over’ / neghllughngaaq ‘it has fallen over’; Qawaak tugunaqluku neghlluumaanga. ‘I fell into the water trying to take the bird.’ (SLI. JR. DICT. 117)	ныҳльюӷ-
neghnapik	pos	IPA	king crab (Paralithodes camtschatica)	No information given.	ныӷнапик
neghnaq	pos	IPA	crab	No information given.	ныӷнақ
neghnavregaq	pos	IPA	rock crab (Hyas lyratus or Hyas coarctatus ?)	Esnamun kaalluni igleghsimaluni esghaamakanga esnami unguvalghii tepenghhaq neghnavregaghhaq. ‘When he got to the shore as he was going along he saw on the shore this live rock crab that had just drifted ashore.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 15)	ныӷнаврыгақ
neghneghngwaagh-	pos	IPA	to scent; to smell something (about animals)	Chukotkan (R)	ныӷнықңӱāӷ-
neghniimsugute-	pos	IPA	to snack	qikmit siipneghmeng neghniimsugutaqut ‘the dogs are snacking on left over food’; qawaak esnemi sameng neghniimsuguteghllaguuq ‘birds are snacking on something at the coast’	ныӷнӣмсугюты-
neghpigaq	pos	IPA	main living area	mangtegham neghpigaa ‘the house’s main living area’	ныҳпигақ
neghqe-	pos	IPA	"to feed (dogs, people, etc.)"	neghqaa ‘he is feeding it or him’ / neghqiiq ‘he is feeding something or someone’; Aghhutanga tamaghhaan neghqaqanka qikminka. ‘I feed my dogs every day.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 118)	ныҳқы-
neghqugh-	pos	IPA	to have rheumatism; to have arthritis; to ache in the bones and/or joints	neghqughtuq or neghqughaa ‘he has aching bones and joints’ / cf. neghqwaaq	ныҳқуӷ-
neghqughruk	pos	IPA	skeleton; very skinny person	No information given.	ныҳқуӷрук
neghqun	pos	IPA	feed (for dogs or other animals)	No information given.	ныҳқун
neghqusi-	pos	IPA	cut up food for dogs	No information given.	ныҳқуси-
neghqusitaq	pos	IPA	dog food container	"used in the dual, neghqusitak, for one such container; neghqutkameng neghqusitak ulevaghaghtagka ‘I filled the dog food container full’"	ныҳқуситақ
neghqutkaq	pos	IPA	feed (for dogs or other animals)	#NAME?	ныҳқуткақ
neghqwaaghtaq	pos	IPA	bone strip running the length of the keel of skin boat	No information given.	ныҳқӱāҳтақ
neghqwaaq	pos	IPA	bone; framing member (as of house)	#NAME?	ныҳқӱāқ
neghsanghaq	pos	IPA	rope made from seal skin	Chukotkan (R)	ныҳсянӷақ
neghsapik	pos	IPA	adult ring seal (Phoca hispida)	Kamengllaghaqegkangit neghsapiget. Qazigyameng melqulighluku yuget ipigtuluku …. ‘They made (hunting) skin-boots from ringed seal (skin). People put spotted seal on the boot legs ….’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)	ныҳсяпик
neghsaq	pos	IPA	seal	cf. negh<e>-; = naghsaq	ныҳсяқ
neghusiq	pos	IPA	dish; plate; meal	No information given.	ныӷусиқ
neghuva-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > neghuvate-, neghuvaghsagh-"	ныӷува-
neghuvaghsagh-	pos	IPA	to make soft and smooth	No information given.	ныӷуваҳсяӷ-
neghuvate-	pos	IPA	to be soft	neghuvatuq ‘it is soft’; neghuvalnguq ‘soft thing’	ныӷуваты-
neghyaghqangllagh-	pos	IPA	to prepare food	No information given.	ныӷьяҳқаңльяӷ-
neghyaghqaq	pos	IPA	food	No information given.	ныӷяҳқақ
neghyu-	pos	IPA	to hope; to expect	neghyuuq ‘he hopes for something’ /	ныӷью-
neghyugtaghagh-	pos	IPA	to dream about something; to always rely on somebody	Chukotkan (R)	ныӷьюхтаӷаӷ-
neghyuke-	pos	IPA	to hope concerning (it)	neghyukaa ‘he hopes concerning him or it’ / neghyukaqa tagilleghqan ‘I hope that you will come’	ныӷьюкы-
negifkaqu-	pos	IPA	to appear (of thawed patches)	Chukotkan (R)	ныгифкақу-
negig-	pos	IPA	to cut out a piece of material or skin; to tear out of someone’s hands	negigaa ‘she cut it out’/ negigutuq ‘she cut out something’; negilleq ‘a cut out piece’; cf. negili	ныгиг-
negighqu-	pos	IPA	to cut out the various pieces needed to make something	No information given.	ныгиҳқу-
negikragh-	pos	IPA	to cut out a pattern	No information given.	ныгикшаӷ-
negili	pos	IPA	neck opening of garment; collar	cf. negig-	ныгили
negilitaan	pos	IPA	trimming at the neck of a woman's hoodless garment	No information given.	ныгилитāн
negitelqwaaq	pos	IPA	hollow area in collarbone	Chukotkan (R)	ныгитыльқāқ
negitughqe-	pos	IPA	to gasp when food goes down slowly after swallowing	tuufluni negitughquq ‘he swallowed and he is gasping because it is going down slow’; sangavek negitughqesin? ‘why are you gasping?’	ныгитуҳқы-
negitughqwe- 	pos	IPA	to hiccup	Chukotkan (R. V&E )	ныгитуҳқӱы-
Negsipa	pos	IPA	site on north shore of Koozata Lagoon	see Map 5 in Appendices	Ныхсипа
negugh-	pos	IPA	to go around an obstacle; to avoid	"negughtuq ‘he went around something’; negughaa ‘he went around it, avoided him’ / neguutaa ‘he took it around something’"	ныгуӷ-
neguqragh-	pos	IPA	to force one’s way	Chukotkan (R); questioned	ныгуқшаӷ-
neguya	pos	IPA	ringworm; skin infection	No information given.	ныгуя
nekaghqaq	pos	IPA	building site; place for something to be located	No information given.	ныкаҳқақ
nekefqaghte-	pos	IPA	to jump up; to take off suddenly	No information given.	ныкыфқаҳты-
nekefte-	pos	IPA	to build	nekeftaa ‘he built it’ / nekeftaat igaghvik ‘they built the school’	ныкыфты-
nekeg-	pos	IPA	put in place; having a good home; quieted down 	postural root;  nekegtuq ‘he/it got into its appropriate place’; nekegtaa ‘he put it in its appropriate place’; nekegngaaq ‘it is in its appropriate place’; Nekeggnakesi wayaq igaasim iqugan inglungakun scotch tape-meng 1-1/4 inch piizngaan. ‘Fasten the wire to the end of the pencil leaving about 1-1/4 inches protruding.’ (SULUWET 25)	ныкыг-
nekeggmelleq	pos	IPA	peace	in Bible translation	ныкыхмыльық
nekeggneqigte-	pos	IPA	to restore; to put back in the appropriate place	No information given.	ныкыхньықихты-
nekegneghaq	pos	IPA	floor plan	mangtegham nekegneghaa ‘the plan of the house’	ныкыгныӷақ
nekegpagte-	pos	IPA	to creak; to change for the better	Mangteghaq anuqlim nekegpagtaghqaa. ‘The wind made the house creak.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 119); Unaaghniinenq anuqeghllak nekegpagtaa. ‘The wind died down from the way it was this morning.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 119)	ныкыхрахты-
nekegsiilliqe-	pos	IPA	to worry; to play noisily	Chukotkan (R)	ныкыхсӣльиқы-
nekeve-	pos	IPA	to stand up	"nekevuq ‘he stood up’ / nekevestaa (or nekeftaa) ‘he stood it up, made him stand up’"	ныкывы-
nekevgha-	pos	IPA	to be standing	nekevghaaq ‘he is standing’ /	ныкывӷа-
nekga-	pos	IPA	to calm down; to stop rushing	Chukotkan (V&E)	ныкха-
nekginaq	pos	IPA	powdery snow	No information given.	ныкхинақ
nekgute-	pos	IPA	to bring something to its place; to put away; to put in the proper place	"tamlagluta angyaghput nekgutaqaghputlu aghvenguughtut ‘we landed  and just as we put our boat away, they caught a whale’"	ныкхуты-
nekleg-	pos	IPA	to die down (of wind); to diminish (of a bad condition)	Anuqeghllak neklegtuq. ‘The strong wind is dying down.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 119); Ighneghhaghma unulqusiq qiilghwa neklegataaghaghtuq aghsan.’ My little boy’s coughing the whole night diminished when morning came.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 119)	ныкльыг-
nekreg-	pos	IPA	to hook as with a gaff	nekregtuq ‘he hooked himself’; nekregaa ‘he hooked it’ / nekregiiq ‘he hooked something’; = nakreg-	ныкшыг-
nekrek	pos	IPA	hook; gaff	#NAME?	ныкшык
nekrewaagh-	pos	IPA	to crochet	No information given.	ныкшыӱāӷ-
nekwaagh-	pos	IPA	to be settled down	No information given.	ныкӱāӷ-
nelegte-	pos	IPA	to put in place securely	No information given.	нылыхты-
nelgughte-	pos	IPA	to never move once one has stopped	"nanuq malighqughluku tagtalmi paghyughyami nelgughtuq ‘I ran after the polar bear, and all of a sudden it got tired and stopped never to go any further’"	нылгуҳты-
neli-	pos	IPA	to build; to establish a home	neliiq ‘he built a house’; nelii ‘he built a house for her or made it into a house’ /	ныли-
neliite-	pos	IPA	"to take up residence at (it, a house)"	neliitiit ‘they have made it their home’	нылӣты-
nellaaghqe-	pos	IPA	to drive out of one's home	nellaaghqaa ‘he drove it or him from its or his home’ /	нылья̄ҳқы-
nelliqe-	pos	IPA	to engage in unacceptable behavior	"of children, generally"	ныльиқы-
nellug-	pos	IPA	uncomfortable; claustrophobic; ill at ease	"emotional root; nellugyugtuq ‘he feels uncomfortable, claustrophobic, ill at ease’; nellugnaghtuq ‘it makes one feel uncomfortable, ill at ease, claustrophobic’"	ныльюг-
nemegh-	pos	IPA	to lash; to tie up; to stitch overcast	nemghaa ‘he tied it (package or the like)’ / nemghutaa box-mun ‘he tied it around the box’; nemeghluku kakinnaken allighta ‘use an overcast stitch to sew the sealskin sock’	нымыӷ-
nemeghyaq	pos	IPA	kelp type; snake; serpent	"exact identification of kelp undetermined; the snake is known through the Bible and from contact with outsiders; Kayagtekumsi penniighestun qungangitnilngughestun amaat lliighlequsi enkaam kelengalusi nemeghyastun, … ‘I am sending you out like sheep into the midst of wolves; so be as wise as serpents ….’ (Matthew 10.16)"	нымыӷьяқ
nemeq	pos	IPA	lashing	No information given.	нымық
nemeq	pos	IPA	type of stitch	exact identification undetermined	нымық
nemetwha-	pos	IPA	to stay home; to stay in one place; to be on one’s own	"… pengegniighutaaten. Masingka nemetwhayaaghtaaten."" ‘She said to her younger brother, “… You are no longer someone who one must worry about. You can be on your just fine now.”’ (UNGIPAGH. 162)"	нымытӱьа-
nemghutaq	pos	IPA	"rope, cord, thong, etc. used for lashing"	No information given.	нымӷутақ
neneq	pos	IPA	act of eating	"used in the ablative-modalis as the indefinite object of the verb taaqe- ‘to finish’: neneghmeng taaqluni ‘after he finished eating’; North Star usiista tagiiquq. Aghnequn neneghmeng taaqegkufsi igaghnaanghitusinguq. ‘The North Star freighter is coming. This afternoon when you’re done eating there will be no more school.’ (SULUWET 3); Neneghmeng taaqsameng, tawatengwaaq tuguluku qayuusiq wine-eghraghameng imalek, …. ‘When they finished eating, He lifted that cup full of wine, ….’ (1 Corinthins 11.25)"	нынық
nengaa	pos	IPA	daughter's husband (son-in-law); brother-in-law (sister's husband)	nengaaka ‘my male in-law’	ныңā
nengaawaq	pos	IPA	a man who is working (according to custom) for the parents of the woman he will marry; son-in-law to be	"w in this word comes from the ancient form *nengauk (as still in Central Alaskan Yup'ik) of the parent word nengaa (which itself, however, shows no trace of  u)"	ныңāӱақ
nengaawiqe-	pos	IPA	to work for the parents of the woman one will marry	No information given.	ныңāӱиқы-
nengagh-	pos	IPA	to go off angrily or sulking; to stalk off	nengaghtuq ‘he stalked off’ /	ныңаӷ-
nenge-	pos	IPA	to stretch; to tighten	"nenguq ‘it stretched’ / nengtaa ‘he stretched it, tightened it’; nengestaa ‘he made it stretch’; cf. nengug-"	ныңы-
nengekeregiigh-	pos	IPA	to not reach something	Chukotkan (R)	ныңыкырыгӣӷ-
nengenghigh-	pos	IPA	"to tire, slow down and lose enthusiasm as from working too hard"	uygulluku qimugsighllagem qenwat qikmii nengenghightut ‘his dogs are getting tired from pulling too much’; qikmima nengenghiitaanga ‘my dogs are getting too slow for me’	ныңынӷиӷ
nengerqagh-	pos	IPA	to stretch skin	Chukotkan (V&E)	ныңышқаӷ-
Nengesighviget	pos	IPA	creek and valley that comes out near Vngyat Pt. (Angyat) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ныңысиӷвигыт
nengigh-	pos	IPA	to receive a share of a catch which has been distributed	nengightuq ‘he received his share’ /	ныңиӷ-
nengighqe-	pos	IPA	to divide and distribute one's catch	nengighqaa ‘he divided it’ /	ныңиҳқы-
nengighqelleq	pos	IPA	division (the process of ~)	Nengighqelleghmeng liitunga igaghvigmi. ‘I learned to do division in school.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 85)	ныңиҳқыльық
Nengiighhaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Ныңӣҳаӷмӣ(т)
Nengiighhaq	pos	IPA	Ningeehak Beach on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ныңӣҳақ
nengiighhaq*	pos	IPA	little place; little thing; little old couple (when used in dual)	nengiighhaak ‘little old couple’	ныңӣҳақ
nenginaaqu-	pos	IPA	to be unable to proceed while traveling; be stuck in place	"akmagluni uusneghwaaghmi quulmun nenginaaqulghii kayusiitaa quulmun ‘he was trying to climb up a bank (hill) with a large pack but he wasn’t moving, so he helped him out’; ullghitagnekun aghqumlami nenginaaquluni pegnem alpagtuq ‘he couldn’t move with his wheeled/tracked vehicle in the marsh,  but then finally he did manage to get out’"	ныңинāқу-
nengiq	pos	IPA	share of a catch	No information given.	ныңиқ
nengitugh-	pos	IPA	to have a hard time getting to the desired place or into the desired position or situation; to feel uncomfortable where or how one is	qikmiq wiin ungleghpenani nengitughtuq ‘the dog shuffled around some before it lay down where it wanted to’; aqupileghraam nengitughtuq ‘he was being bothered by  the situation so he felt uncomfortable’	ныңитуӷ-
nengki	pos	IPA	prop; support; blind with gun props for hunting	#NAME?	ныңки
nengki-	pos	IPA	to prop up	nengkii ‘he propped it up’ / = nenki-	ныңки-
nenglagh-	pos	IPA	to laugh	nenglaghtuq ‘he laughed’ / nenglaatkaa ‘he laughed about it or him’; nenglaghtaa ‘he made her laugh’; nenglaghqaghtuq ‘he roared with laughter’	ныңляӷ-
nenglaghnagh-	pos	IPA	to be funny	nenglaghnaghtuq ‘it is funny’ /	ныңляӷнаӷ-
nenglaghnaq	pos	IPA	funny thing	No information given.	ныңляӷнақ
nenglaghyugsagh-	pos	IPA	to make fun of someone	nenglaghyugsaghtuq ‘he made fun of someone’ / nenglaghyugsaatkaa ‘he made fun of her’	ныңляӷюхсяӷ-
nenglasiigh-	pos	IPA	to chuckle	nenglasiightuq ‘he chuckled’ / 	ныңлясӣӷ-
nenglek	pos	IPA	coldness	cf. nangllagh-	ныңлык
nenglekegte-	pos	IPA	"to be icy cold (of liquid or solid, not person or weather)"	No information given.	ныңлыкыхты-
nenglengestagh-	pos	IPA	to giggle	nenglengestaghtuq ‘he giggled’ /	ныңлыңыстаӷ-
nengli-	pos	IPA	to cool off	nengliiq ‘it/he cooled off’ / nengliiq puqleghalleghmineng ‘he cooled off from his high fever’	ныңли-
nenglisigh-	pos	IPA	to cool off food	nenglisighaa ‘he cooled it off ‘/	ныңлисиӷ-
nengllitaq	pos	IPA	tooth that is abnormally sensitive to the cold	No information given.	ныңльитақ
nenglliyug-	pos	IPA	to be abnormally sensitive to the cold	"gguutka nenglliyugllak gguutniightemun kelgulluku ilaaghaa ‘my tooth was really sensitive to the cold, so I had the dentist check it and he put a filling on it’"	ныңльиюг-
nenglliyug-	pos	IPA	to be sensitive to cold (especially of teeth)	gguutka nenglliyugtuq ‘my tooth feels sensitive to the cold’	ныңльиюг-
nengllugun	pos	IPA	housemate; fellow family member	also nengllugta; nengllugutet ‘a family’; Paapgaq iteghluni qukiitgun nengllugutmi aghuliighumalghii. ‘After coming in Paapgaq stopped in the midst of his family members.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG.16)	ныңгльюгун
nenglu	pos	IPA	semi-subterrranean house	"this is the Yupik form of the Eskimo word which has entered English as ""igloo""; the semi-subterranean house was used by Yupik people on St. Lawrence Is. until replaced by the dome-shaped walrus-hide covered Chukchi-style house, mangteghaq or mengteghaq, (now referred to as mangteghapik or mengteghapik), in the late 1800’s or early 1900’s; Nenglu qafsin'guyaghta uglaghraak qaya paamna nenglulighvigilnguq tangeghtughllak. ‘One can’t say how many semi-subterranean houses there were but it was quite a few, but up there the ground was too hard and there were no semi-subterranean houses.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:18)"	ныңлю
Nengluvek	pos	IPA	site on north shore of Koozata Lagoon	see Map 5 in Appendices	Ныңлювык
nengpagte-	pos	IPA	to yank on a rope; to suddenly become angry and stay angry	No information given.	ныңпахты-
nengqe-	pos	IPA	to be tense; to have a cramp; to have sore muscles	nengquq ‘it is tense; he has sore muscles’ /	ныңқы-
nengrak	pos	IPA	skin ailment characterized by itching and redness; dermatitis	cf. neguya	ныңрак
nengrugh-	pos	IPA	to have rheumatism	cf. nengqugh-	ныңруӷ-
nengruuqi-	pos	IPA	to be reluctant to go out or go on a trip because the cold	"uksumi nengruuqinalghii sapeghhnami ‘one can be reluctant to go out in the extreme cold in the winter’; sapeghhnaghllak nengruuqingigatutmineng ullghitagni igleghtestaak ‘in as much as he is not being bothered by extreme cold, he started up his snowmachine (in order to ride it)’; nengruuqifqaavek aani ‘don’t be hesitant due to the cold, go out’; cf. nenglek"	ныңруқи-
nengsugpagtagh-	pos	IPA	to jerk uncontrollably	No information given.	ныңсюхпахтаӷ-
nengsugpagte-	pos	IPA	to strain a muscle; to make an injury worse	No information given.	ныңсюхпахты-
nengtaatagaq	pos	IPA	rubber	Chukotkan (V&E)	ныңтāтагақ
nengtaataq	pos	IPA	accordion	"used in the dual, nengtaatak, for one accordian"	ныңтāтақ
nengte-	pos	IPA	to stretch (it)	nengtaa ‘he stretched it’ /	ныңты-
nengug-	pos	IPA	to reach across; to tug	nengugtuq ‘he reached across’; nengugaa ‘he reached across for it’ / nengugutaa ‘he waved it in the air’; cf. nenge-	ныңуг-
nengughte-	pos	IPA	to get married; to become populated	"nengughtuq or nengughtut ‘it became populated’; nengughtuk ‘they2 got married, established a home’; nengughtelqa ‘my anniversary’"	ныңуҳты-
nengugutiiraagh-	pos	IPA	to vote	Chukotkan (R)	ныңугутӣрāӷ-
nengukagh-	pos	IPA	to snatch; to strike with hand or fist	"nengukaghaa ‘he snatched it, struck him’ /"	ныңукаӷ-
nengulgha-	pos	IPA	for waves to break on the beach; for surf to come up and sweep across beach after waves break	nengulghallghet ‘the place where the waves break or broke’; nengulghavikaa ‘the waves reached it’; cf. nenguugte-	ныңулӷа-
nengumaste-	pos	IPA	to be the head of a household; to lead the household	Chukotkan (R)	ныңумасты-
nenguugte-	pos	IPA	for wind to get stronger	nenguugtuq or nenguugtaa ‘the wind is picking up’ / cf. nengulgha-	ныңӯхты-
nenguwaagh-	pos	IPA	to grope sexually	No information given.	ныңуӱāӷ-
nenguyugte-	pos	IPA	to live somewhere as if in one’s own home	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	ныңуюхты-
nengwaaqe-	pos	IPA	to live somewhere as if in one’s own home	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	ныңӱāқы-
nengyaapellegaq	pos	IPA	“ringtail snail” fish	exact identification undetermined	ныңья̄пыльыгақ
nengyughllak	pos	IPA	great-grandmother	No information given.	ныңьюҳльяк
nengyuq	pos	IPA	grandmother	"“Nengyuuy,” piiq afsengaghhaq, “whanga iknaqellghuftunga pinighqaallghuftunga, …” ‘“Grandma,” said the little mouse, “I’m the strongest and the best, …”’ (AANGHHAQ 38)"	ныңьюқ
nengzighhe-	pos	IPA	to stretch one's body as upon waking	nengzighhuq ‘he stretched’ /	ныңзиҳы-
nengziik	pos	IPA	grasshopper or grasshopper-like insect	Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined	ныңзӣк
nenki	pos	IPA	prop; support; blind with gun props for hunting	#NAME?	нынки
nenki-	pos	IPA	to prop up	nenkii ‘he propped it up’ / = nengki-	нынки-
nepasanagh-	pos	IPA	to be misty or drizzly	cf. nepsuk	ныпасянаӷ-
nepasanaq	pos	IPA	mist; drizzle	No information given.	ныпасянақ
nepiigh-	pos	IPA	to become silent	"nepiightuq ‘he became silent’ / nepiighutaa ‘he became silent about it’; Nepiinghata aqumneghmini paaghqiiluni. ‘When the voices stopped, she sat up and there was no one to be seen.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198); cf. nepuk, mae"	ныпӣӷ-
nepiiq	pos	IPA	silence	No information given.	ныпӣқ
nepite-	pos	IPA	to be unintelligible; to speak with an impairment	"akuzillgha nepiteghllak enkaam tusaqepanghitaqa ‘his way of talking was unintelligible, so I didn’t understand him much’"	ныпиты-
nepititaghte-	pos	IPA	to bring a boat (or the like) from the breakers and to secure it	"angyaghsi nepititaghlluku ayviitek ‘get your boat away from the waves and secure it first, and then butcher the walrus’"	ныпититҳты-
nepneqagh-	pos	IPA	"to stick (it -- knife, axe, etc.) into or onto something when not in use"	nepneqaghaa ‘he stuck it into something’ / cf. neve-	ныпньықаӷ-
neprakegtagh-	pos	IPA	to lack self-control	Chukotkan (R)	ныпшакыхтаӷ-
nepsaate-	pos	IPA	to get dirty; to get soaking wet	eslallugmi taghnughhaat nepsaasimalghiit ‘the children got soaking wet in the rain’; aghinaghllagmi nepsaasimaat qalingunateng ‘without raincoats they got soaking wet in the rain’	ныпсāты-
nepsag-	pos	IPA	to soak or sop up liquid	Iingka kuuvluku vegllugmeng nepsagaqa. ‘I spilled my ink and sopped it up with a towel.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 122)	ныпсяг-
nepsigtaq	pos	IPA	"dish made by mixing frozen and then thawed quvegsi (a certain sourdock type plant, Polygonum tripterocarpum), seal blood and oil"	Chukotkan (R)	ныпсихтақ
nepsuk	pos	IPA	wet weather	cf. nepsanaq	ныпсюк
neptaarakegte-	pos	IPA	to tend to try to dominate a conversation; to tend to speak without thinking through what one will say	"neptaarakegtutmineng ilakniighutuq ‘since he immediately speaks without thinking, he became unpopular’"	ныптāракыхты-
neptaarakegte-	pos	IPA	be outspoken	No information given.	ныптāракыхты-
nepte-	pos	IPA	to dip into water or other liquid	neptuq ‘he dipped himself in’; neptaa ‘he dipped it in’ / neptutuq ‘he dipped something in’; nepfikaa ‘he dipped something into it’; cf. nepsag-	ныпты-
nepuk	pos	IPA	the sound of many people talking at once	"cf. nepiiq, mae; Yuget nepuguteghllaguut esnami. ‘Many people are talking at the beach.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 123)"	ныпук
neqae	pos	IPA	food; flesh	cf. negh<e>-	нықаы
neqagh-	pos	IPA	to recall; to remember	neqaghtuq ‘he recalled something’; neqaghaa ‘he recalled it’ / neqaataa or neqaatkaa ‘he recalled something because of it’	нықаӷ-
neqamike-	pos	IPA	to remember (without having forgotten); to not forget	neqamikaa ‘he remembers it’ / neqamikiiq ‘he remembers something’; neqamikelleqamken’ I shall remember you’	нықамикы-
neqangisag-	pos	IPA	to run short of food; to suffer famine	No information given.	нықаңисяг-
neqangugh-	pos	IPA	to think of; to remember	"igaghyalleghqaqa neqangughluku qavaghyaghtughtunga ‘I remembered that I would have to go to school (the next day), so I went [home] to get some sleep’; igaghyami liitkanka neqangughanka ‘I remembered what I learned in school’"	нықаңуӷ-
neqekrak	pos	IPA	bread; pilot bread; cracker	a Gambell word	нықыкшак
neqekrangllaasiq	pos	IPA	breadpan	No information given.	нықыкшаңлья̄сиқ
neqekrangllagh-	pos	IPA	to bake bread; to make fried bread	No information given.	нықыкшаңльяӷ-
neqekrangllaq	pos	IPA	fried bread	No information given.	нықыкшаңльяқ
neqekrangllaqaq	pos	IPA	loaf of bread	No information given.	нықыкшаңльяқақ
neqelghutaq	pos	IPA	cache; storage place for food	No information given.	нықылӷутақ
neqelluk	pos	IPA	old food	No information given.	нықыльюк
neqenghaghqae	pos	IPA	feast	No information given.	нықынӷаҳқаы
neqenghaghqe-	pos	IPA	to hold a feast	No information given.	нықынӷаҳқы-
neqengyu-	pos	IPA	to be a good hunter	No information given.	нықыңью-
neqengyuqaq	pos	IPA	good hunter	No information given.	нықыңьюқақ
neqesghaq	pos	IPA	bait for a trap	No information given.	нықысҳақ
neqesupa	pos	IPA	glutton	slang	нықысюпа
neqete-	pos	IPA	to catch fish or game; to obtain food	"Kaalluninguq, ""Kii nutaan repall neqetuten” ""Aa, nutaan repall neqetunga."" ‘After he arrived, [she said to him], “This is the first time in ages you’ve gotten something to eat, isn’t it?” “Yes, this is the first time in a long time I’ve gotten food.”’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:268); neqennaqa ‘one who is going to catch fish or game’"	нықыты-
neqiinagh-	pos	IPA	to eat without further ado	neqiinaghtuq ‘he went right over and ate’	нықӣнаҳ-
neqinquq	pos	IPA	depression in the ground; valley	"Awiim neqinquq sangwaa, sengnguqayuk. ‘Probably it was some sort of depression in the ground where water comes up.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:4)"	нықинқуқ
neqligh-	pos	IPA	to poison	neqlighaa ‘he poisoned it’ /	нықльиӷ-
neqlightugh-	pos	IPA	to offer food	neqlightughtuq ‘he offer food’; neqlightughaa ‘he offer food to her’ /	нықльиҳтуӷ-
neqngwaaq	pos	IPA	sweets	Chukotkan (R)	нықңӱāқ
neqnigh-	pos	IPA	to be tasty	No information given.	нықньиӷ-
neqnighsaan	pos	IPA	spice; seasoning	No information given.	нықньиҳся̄н
neqnighsaasiq	pos	IPA	perfume	No information given.	нықньиҳся̄сиқ
neqniilliqe-	pos	IPA	to not enjoy eating	No information given.	нықньӣльиқы-
neqniite-	pos	IPA	to not be tasty	No information given.	нықньӣты-
neqniqe-	pos	IPA	to find tasty	No information given.	нықньиқы-
netuughnagh-	pos	IPA	to be frustrating or discouraging	"netuughnaghhalek qepghaghyaghqanka ukut neqet kumlaaghqengngaaghllaget, naten piqeghllani neghyaghtuutgagilgata ‘oh how frustrating it is to work with this frozen meat, and how will I ever get done before dinner!’"	нытӯӷнаӷ-
netuughnaq	pos	IPA	discouraging situation; frustrating situation	No information given.	нытӯӷнақ
netuughniqe-	pos	IPA	to feel discouraged or frustrated	netuughniquq ‘he feels discouraged or frustrated’ / netuughniqutkaa ‘he feels discouraged or frustrated over it’	нытӯӷниқы-
nevagh-	pos	IPA	lying on the back	"postural root; nevaghtuq ‘he lay down on his back’; nevaghtaa ‘he laid it (or her) down on its (or her) back’; nevaghngaaq ‘he is lying on his back’; nevaghmi ‘lying on his back’; neghsaq nevaan qamughaa ‘he dragged the seal in such a way that it was on its back’; nevaghlluku nevaan aftaa ‘he put its back on the ground, on its back, and butchered it’; = nevegh-"	нываӷ-
nevagha-	pos	IPA	to be sticky	taghnughhaam iiggi nevaghaat candy-meng tugumiighluni ‘the child’s hands were sticky because he was holding a piece of candy’; nevuutkaq nevaghangakun makregtaa ‘he took off the one that was stuck from the  sticky part of it’	нываӷа-
nevangquq	pos	IPA	sinker for crabline	"ayumiq iqaniighyat uyghagmeng nevangquqaqut; naayghamun nevangqughsiighyaghaqelghiit ‘in the old days, they used rocks for sinkers in crabbing; they would go to the mountain to get rocks to be used for sinkers’"	нываңқуқ
neve-	pos	IPA	to stick; to cling; to adhere	"nevaa ‘it is sticking to it’ / nevestaa ‘he stuck it onto something, glued it on’; nevnaghtuq ‘it is sticky’; qanigem atkuyaghqek nevaak ‘the snow is clinging to her clothes’; Sangyaghsagu nusugyaqegka, iqallugam neveghllagumakanga. ‘When it (the accumulation) made it heavy, he pulled it (his tail)  out and tomcods were clinging to it in a major way.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 64); cf. neftegte-, nefsukaghlleq, nepneqagh-"	нывы-
nevegh-	pos	IPA	lying on the back	"postural root; neveghtuq ‘he lay down on his back’; neveghtaa ‘he laid it (or her) down on its (or her) back’; neveghngaaq ‘he is lying on his back’; neveghmi ‘lying on his back’; neveghlluku nevaan aftaa ‘he put its back on the ground, on its back, and butchered it’; = nevagh-"	нывыӷ-
nevesqaghneq	pos	IPA	chunk of ice or floe loosely adhering to edge of sea ice floe or field	see item 37 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	нывысқаӷнық
nevestaasiq	pos	IPA	glue	No information given.	нывыстāсиқ
nevestaq	pos	IPA	rock sucker (fish)	species identification undetermined	нывыстақ
neveyeghnite-	pos	IPA	to be sticky; to be gummy	neveyeghnituq ‘it is sticky or gummy’ /	нывыӥыӷниты-
"neviin, neviita"	pos	IPA	device for freeing a frozen-in hook	"used in the plural, neviitet, for one such device"	"нывӣн, нывита"
neviitaq	pos	IPA	sod-pick	No information given.	нывӣтақ
nevligh-1	pos	IPA	to notch	nevlighaa ‘he notched it’ / nevlightughaa ‘he notched it all around’	нывлиӷ-1
nevligh-2	pos	IPA	to return to a certain way of doing things	No information given.	нывлиӷ-2
nevngig-	pos	IPA	to easily stick on something; to be sticky	"nevestaasit nevngipigtut ‘the glue sticks on easily’; mesiighneghakun amiiram nguuyngaaghaq nevuuquuteghllagumalghii, qayughllak nengigtuq ‘flies have stuck on to the oily part of the sealskin, because it is sticky’"	нывңиг-
nevughtaq	pos	IPA	"sod block lower wall of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	нывуҳтақ
nevuq	pos	IPA	sod; lump of soil	No information given.	нывуқ
Nevuuqaq	pos	IPA	Naukan; East Cape in Chukotka (north of (Central Siberian) Yupik area) 	village in Siberia speaking another variety of Yupik linguistically more or less midway between Central Siberian Yupik (as spoken on St. Lawrence Island and at Sireniki and New Chaplino) and Central Alaskan Yup'ik; Nevuuqaghhmiit ‘the people of Naukan’	Нывӯқақ
nevuute-	pos	IPA	to stick to something; to stick to each other	nevuutuq ‘it got stuck to something’; nevuutuk ‘they2 got stuck together’	нывӯты-
nevyaghaq	pos	IPA	baleen strip used for fishing line	Chukotkan (R)	нывьяӷақ
ngaalgeliigteng	pos	IPA	anywhere; everywhere; back an forth	Chukotkan (R); particle; ellnga ngaalgeligteng igleghtaquq ‘he is going just anywhere’; kaviipik ngaalgeligteng igleghsimaaq ‘the red fox went in every which direction’	ңāлгылӣгтың
ngaayuun	pos	IPA	condition wherein floes crowd densely together making boat passage difficult and dangerous	see item 38 in Oozeva et al. 2004	ңāю̄н
ngaayuute-	pos	IPA	to be blocked by chunks of floating sea ice	No information given.	ңāю̄ты-
ngawaq	pos	IPA	you know; after all	"Chukotkan (R); particle; ngawaq liisimaksaqevnga taginaanghilnguunga ‘after all, you already knew that I wasn’t going to come’"	ңаӱақ
ngayawell	pos	IPA	herd; flock	Chukotkan (R)	ңаяӱыль
ngelqaq1	pos	IPA	pelagic cormorant (Phalacrocorax pelagicus)	No information given.	ңыльқақ1
Ngelqaq2	pos	IPA	mainland Alaskan Eskimo	"this word is used with this meaning in legends and may be connected with the meaning, ""cormorant"""	Ңыльқақ2
ngepeghte-	pos	IPA	to go directly to a place without stopping	Uuyneghmeng Qayiilleghnun piyugmeng ngepeghtaghput ‘we walked from Uuyneq directly to Qayiilleq without stopping’; ngepeghsaghaq taakepigtuq ‘the journey without stopping is really long’	ңыпыҳты-
ngepghute-	pos	IPA	to surface (of whales)	ngepghunnanightuq ‘it doesn’t come to the surface anymore’	ңыпҳуты-
ngepsighaq	pos	IPA	septum of nose	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, ngepsighak, for one septum"	ңыпсиӷақ
ngetaq	pos	IPA	majority	Chukotkan (R)	ңытақ
ngevrangilnguq*	pos	IPA	sloppy person; slovenly person	No information given.	ңывраңилңуқ
ngevreghagte-	pos	IPA	to be smooth and shiny	"Piyaqminigu kaay, tagneqgalek qallevagkek ngevreghagllutek. ‘When she did that [turned] toward it, there was a person with dark shiny coveralls.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:248); cf. ngevreghsaasiq, ngevrangilnguq"	ңыврыӷахты-
ngevreghsaasiq	pos	IPA	shoe brush	"Chukotkan (V&E); used in the plural, ngevreghsaasit, for one brush"	ңыврыҳся̄сиқ
ngevyeg-	pos	IPA	to pinch or scratch with fingernails	ngevyegaa ‘he scratched her’ /	ңывӥыг-
ngevzin	pos	IPA	"smooth-surfaced shorefast ice, good for traveling over"	see item 39 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ңывзин
"ngiiggun, ngiiggutaq"	pos	IPA	weight put on top of something to hold it in place	No information given.	"ңӣхун, ңӣхутақ"
ngiigte-	pos	IPA	to put weight (including part one’s body) on something to hold it in place	ngiigtaa ‘he put weight on it’ /	ңӣхты-
Ngiigtekaq	pos	IPA	site on the coast east of Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Ңӣхтыкақ
"ngiikaq, ngiikaaq"	pos	IPA	northern pintail (Anas acuta)	No information given.	"ңӣкақ, Ңӣкāқ"
ngiillginagh-	pos	IPA	to want to go somewhere or do something but be unable to because doing something else	"Sivungaghqaallghiinun ngiillginaghtuq ‘he really would have wanted to go with the others to Savoonga’; laalighsughngaaghmi qayughllak pili legan ngiillginaghluni kivaaghtuq ‘although he wanted to visit, he couldn’t and his desire to do so lessened’"	ңӣльхинаӷ-
ngiiqe-	pos	IPA	"to bend over from carrying a heavy load, due to head wind, or due to dragging something by a rope stretching back over the shoulder"	Chukotkan (R)	ңӣқы-
ngillegte-	pos	IPA	to moan; to groan	ngillegtuq ‘he is moaning and groaning’ / aqnighneghan ngillegtestaa unulqusiq ‘his ailment made him moan all night’	ңильыхты-
ngilvil	pos	IPA	herd; flock	probably more a Chukchi word used in Chukotkan Yupik than a Yupik word from Chukchi	ңилвил
nguleghte-	pos	IPA	to stretch (particularly a boot sole) with a stretching stick	nguleghtaa ‘he is stretching it’ /	ңулыҳты-
ngurngighuq	pos	IPA	woman's husband's brother's wife (sister-in-law in this one limited sense)	No information given.	ңурңиӷуқ
Ngusighmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Ңусиӷми(т)
Ngusiik	pos	IPA	Boxer Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ңусӣк
nguug-	pos	IPA	to eat meat clinging to a bone (said of an animal)	nguugtuq ‘it is eating the meat from a bone’; nguugaa ‘it is eating the meat from it’ /	ңӯг-
nguugraq	pos	IPA	whale flesh	No information given.	ңӯграқ
nguulghun	pos	IPA	"stick for stretching boot soles; crosspole in the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	ңӯлӷун
nguutnguk	pos	IPA	wart	No information given.	ңӯтңьук
nguuyngaaghaq*	pos	IPA	housefly	"Iimnanguq.  Kiyaghsimalghii nguuyngaaghaq, umiilgat paallghunkut, qetgeghyaankut, apayepayiighenkut, melnguunkut. ‘Once upon a time there was a housefly who was the king of the mites, the  water striders, the spiders, and the beetles.’ (SULUWET 32); cf. gerungawa ‘yellow meat fly’"	ңӯӥңāӷақ
nighug-	pos	IPA	to be bright (light); to be daylight	nighugtuq ‘it is bright’ / nighugluku ‘while it is daylight’	ниӷуг-
nighugpagte-	pos	IPA	to twinkle	nighugpagtuq ‘it is twinkling’ / 	ниӷухпахты-
nighugtaghagh-	pos	IPA	for dawn to come	No information given.	ниӷухтаӷаӷ-
nighugte-	pos	IPA	to become bright	nighugtuq or nighugtaa ‘it became bright’ /	ниӷухты-
nighugyug-	pos	IPA	to get bright light in one's eyes	No information given.	ниӷугьюг-
nighugyuk	pos	IPA	yellow color	No information given.	ниӷугьюк
nighuk	pos	IPA	light; brightness; radiance	"Taana nighuk kuukgutnguuq mamlegmi, … ‘That light shown in the darkness, …’ (John 1.5)"	ниӷук
nighupagite-	pos	IPA	to be dim or dull	Chukotkan (R)	ниӷупагиты-
nighwaagpagtagh-	pos	IPA	to glitter	cf. nighug-	ниӷӱāхпахтаӷ-
nighwaagrag-	pos	IPA	to be transparent	cf. nighug-	ниӷӱāграг-
nighwaagrak	pos	IPA	glass	cf. nighug-	ниӷӱāграк
niigh-	pos	IPA	to place sticks side by side as when making an elevated rack	qeghat niighluki nefkuurateng qeghaasimakangit ‘they made a rack above their meat rack for the dried seal meat’; cf. niiq	нӣӷ-
niighigh-	pos	IPA	to remove rope holding a skin to a drying frame (and thus remove the skin); to debone a fish	"niighightuq ‘he removed the rope’ or ‘deboned a fish’; niighighaa ‘he is removing it’, ‘he is deboning it’ /"	нӣӷиӷ-
niighraan	pos	IPA	thin rope for weaving	Chukotkan (R)	нӣӷрāн
niighraq	pos	IPA	cage; gate	No information given.	нӣӷрақ
niighte-	pos	IPA	to crush; to press; to lean heavily on	Chukotkan (V&E)	нӣҳты-
niightugh-	pos	IPA	to stretch and lash a skin to a frame for drying	niightughtuq ‘he stretched and lashed a skin for drying’; niightughaa ‘he stretched and lashed it to a frame’ /	нӣҳтуӷ-
niightuun	pos	IPA	frame for drying for sealskin	"also niightuun; used in the dual, niightuutek, for one such frame"	нӣҳтӯн
niighun	pos	IPA	"crossbeam in ceiling of the aagra, the inner room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	Chukotkan (R)	нӣӷун
niilleq	pos	IPA	"frame, square and vertically positioned, for splitting and drying walrus hide"	"used in the dual, niillghek, for one such frame"	нӣльық
niillghwaaq	pos	IPA	soda cracker	so called due to square shape similar to that of a drying frame 	нӣльҳӱāқ
niilquta	pos	IPA	rope used to fasten skin onto drying frame	"Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, niilqutet, for one rope"	нӣльқута
niinghute-	pos	IPA	to surface and then resubmerge (of sea animal or boat in rough water); to plunge into something	"niinghutuq ‘it repeatedly surfaced and resubmerged’ / aghveghllak niinghutagha taaga naghughtuq ‘the big whale passed by, surfacing and resubmerging’; naghughtut niinghutaghamegteggun ‘the boat passed by coming up through rough waves’; iingtameng malighqulghii kaasaghtughluku niinghutfikaa ‘he was chasing the molted bird, and as he was getting close enough, he leaped onto it’"	нӣнӷуты-
niiq	pos	IPA	rod added on drying rack for additional used such as hanging meat	"cf. niin, niita"	нӣқ
"niita, niin"	pos	IPA	lashing of baby walrus hide holding skin to boat frame; rack hanging from ceiling of house used for drying clothes or storage                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   	"used in the plural, niitet, or dual, niitek, for one such rack; cf. niiq"	"нӣта, нӣн"
niite-	pos	IPA	to have a fishbone stuck in one's throat	niituq ‘he has a fishbone stuck in his throat’ /	нӣты-
niive-	pos	IPA	to transfer from one container to another; to pour; to give birth	"niivuq ‘she gave birth’; niivaa ‘he poured, transferred  it’ / cf. nivugh-"	нӣвы-
"nikim, nikimqun"	pos	IPA	as if; just because	"particle; nikimqun yuglluggaanaluni aanaqelghii ‘just like a regular person he goes out all the time’; Elngaatall quyakiinkut qiipaghaghqameng aqelqalget tamaakut aagrateng pinighsaghwaaghumakangit, nikimqun laluramkeghllaget kaannaqut. ‘The ones expecting guests were very happy to see us and had beautified their inner living rooms with cloth just as if lots of white people were going to arrive.’ (PANGEGH. 59)"	"никим, никимқун"
nipallagh-	pos	IPA	to be offended (as from being left out); to feel left out; to be emotionally hurt	"nipallaghtuq ‘he feels hurt, left out’ / nipallaataa ‘he is offended for her sake’, ‘he feels sad because she was left out’; nipallaatkaa ‘he feels offended over it’"	нипальяӷ-
nipallaqe-	pos	IPA	to be offended or emotionally hurt by (it)	nipallaqaa ‘he is hurt by it’ /	нипальяқы-
nipalliqe-	pos	IPA	to feel left out	No information given.	нипальиқы-
nisku	pos	IPA	kerosene heater	#NAME?	ниску
nivugh-	pos	IPA	to pour into another container	"nivughtuq ‘he poured something’; nivughaa ‘he poured it’ / < niive-ugh- (the short i in the derived form, nivugh-, is due to analogy with pairs such as kuuve- / kuvugh- where the short u in the first syllable of the derived word reflects a short vowel in the protoform as still in Central Alaskan Yup'ik kuve-, as if the protoform for niive-had a short i, which is not the case given that the Central Alaskan Yup’ik cognate to niive- is naive-, and not *nive-)"	нивуӷ-
nuge-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nuug-, nugyaghaq, nungyaghaq"	нугы-
nughaghqaq	pos	IPA	reindeer calf; skin of reindeer calf	No information given.	нуӷаҳқақ
nughaq	pos	IPA	caribou or reindeer calf	No information given.	нуӷақ
nughhaq	pos	IPA	woman's sister's child; niece or nephew of a woman through her sister	No information given.	нуҳақ
nughllu	pos	IPA	seal breathing hole in ice	nughllunganilluku unangumalghii ‘he caught the seal at its breathing hole’	нуҳлью
nughtughaq	pos	IPA	small shiny fish type; “delta” smelt	exact identification undetermined; = lughtughaq	нуҳтуӷақ
nughtuqite-	pos	IPA	to be deterred from doing what one had intended	No information given.	нуҳтуқиты-
nugiiq	pos	IPA	kayak harpoon	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	нугӣқ
nugru	pos	IPA	loop; noose	#NAME?	нугру
nugru-	pos	IPA	to put a loop in something	nugruuq ‘he's putting a loop in something’; nugraa ‘he's putting a loop in it’ / = nurgu-	нугру-
nugyaghaq	pos	IPA	entryway to tunnel (saaygu) of semisubterranean house (nenglu)	Chukotkan (R); = nungyaghaq; cf. nuug-	нугьяӷақ
nukaghaq	pos	IPA	second wife in a polygamous marriage	No information given.	нукаӷақ
nukalpigaq	pos	IPA	young man	No information given.	нукальпигақ
nukaq	pos	IPA	stone or iron scraper	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	нукақ
nukeggnagh-	pos	IPA	to cause one to get dirty	nukeggnaghtuq ‘it gets one dirty’ /	нукыхньаӷ-
nukeggnaghqe-	pos	IPA	to get dirty	nukeggnaghquq ‘he got dirty’; nukeggnaghqaa ‘he got it dirty’ /	нукыхньаҳқы-
nukeggnaq	pos	IPA	dirt; filth	No information given.	нукыхньақ
nukeggniigh-	pos	IPA	to clean	nukeggniightuq ‘he cleaned himself or cleaned up his surroundings’; nukeggniighaa ‘he cleaned it ’ /	нукыхньӣӷ-
nukegsuketaq	pos	IPA	person who abhors dirty work	No information given.	нукыхсюкытақ
nukegte-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nukeggnaq, nukegsuketaq"	нукыхты-
nula-	pos	IPA	to multiply; to increase in number or size	nulaaq ‘it increased’ / qikmii nulaat ‘his dogs multiplied’	нуля-
"nulgiigh-, nulngiigh-"	pos	IPA	to relax facial muscles; to become expressionless; to become stony-faced	cf. nulgiite-	"нулгӣӷ-, нулңӣӷ-"
"nulgiite-, nulngiite-"	pos	IPA	to be stony-faced; be expressionless	cf. nulgiigh-	"нулгӣты-, нулңӣты-"
nulighh-	pos	IPA	wife	must be used with postbase or possessed ending; nulighhituq ‘he doesn't have a wife’; nulighqa ‘my wife’; nulighha ‘his wife’; nulighhen ‘your wife’; cf. nuliiq	нулиҳ-
nulighhighaq	pos	IPA	widower	No information given.	нулиҳиӷақ
nulighhwaaq	pos	IPA	exchange wife	No information given.	нулиҳӱāқ
nulighqalgun	pos	IPA	man's wife's sister's husband; brother-in-law (in this one limited sense)	#NAME?	нулиҳқалгун
nulighqullghiik	pos	IPA	man and wife; married couple.	No information given.	нулиҳқульҳӣк
nulightugh-	pos	IPA	to get a wife; to get married (of a man)	nulightughtuq ‘he got married’ /	нулиҳтуӷ-
nuliighqaq	pos	IPA	wife-to-be	No information given.	нулӣҳқақ
nuliingqalgun	pos	IPA	man's wife's sister's husband; brother-in-law (in this one limited sense)	#NAME?	нулӣңқалгун
nuliiq 	pos	IPA	wife	nuliigha ‘his wife’; niliighen ‘your wife’; cf. nulighh-	нулӣқ
nullu	pos	IPA	rump; buttock; upper part of hill or mountain	No information given.	нулью
nulqaviigh-	pos	IPA	to have a difficult time; to be worried or discouraged	"nulqaviightuq ‘he's having a difficult time’ / nulqaviighutkaa ‘he's having a difficult time with it’; Tamaaken apalluqluku ungipaatamsi, nulqaviighutkegpenaan ungvalleghsi, …. ‘Therefore I say unto you, do not worry about your life, ….’ (Mattew  6.25)"	нульқавӣӷ-
nulugh-	pos	IPA	to fish through the ice by jigging; to jig; to ice-fish; to dunk teabag up and down	nulughtuq ‘he ice-fished’ or ‘he dunked a teabag’ / cf. tulughagh-	нулюӷ-
nuluq	pos	IPA	ice-fishing gear; teabag	No information given.	нулюқ
nuluusiq	pos	IPA	fishing rod and reel; jigging equipment	"used in the plural, nuluusit, for one such outfit"	нулӯсиқ
nuna	pos	IPA	land; village; place; ground; floor	nunanga ‘his village’; cf. suna	нуна
Nunaagek	pos	IPA	Stolbi Rocks off the northeast coast of St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Нунāгык
Nunaaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Нунаӷми(т)
nunaaq	pos	IPA	camp; village; town; city	Enkaam llangaqa unangniiq teghigmun aghsaan ayuqaqelghii kiigmi iwemga ilangi nunaaghmeggnun aglaghtuutaqelghiit kiyang unataanunllu. ‘And hunting sea mammals slowed down in the summer so some people would go to their camps mostly to gather greens.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140); Sighinek aangepiglleghhii nunaaghat esnaghmiit. ‘Sirineki is the largest city of the coastal people.’ (AANGHHAQ 152)	нунāқ
nunaghllak	pos	IPA	world (the earth); continent; city	No information given.	нунаҳльяк
nunaki-	pos	IPA	to have a good time; to enjoy oneself; to be happy	nunakiiq ‘he's having a good time’ / nunakitkaa ‘he's having a good time on account of it’;  cf. nuna	нунаки-
nunakingite-	pos	IPA	to be indisposed or otherwise unable to enjoy things	No information given.	нунакиңиты-
Nunalek	pos	IPA	Preobrazhenie Bay and Nunligran (village) in Chukotka	= Nunegraq; well to west of Yupik area in Chukotka; see Map 1 in Appendices	Нуналык
nunalgun	pos	IPA	fellow-countryman; neighbor	No information given.	нуналгун
Nunangighaq	pos	IPA	Nuneangan Is. in Chukotka east of Yttygran Is. (Siqluk)	see Map 3 in Appendices	Нунаңиӷақ
nunangiik	pos	IPA	type of codfish	species identification undetermined	нунаңӣк
nunangite-	pos	IPA	to not have enough room	No information given.	нунаңиты-
nunanigh-	pos	IPA	to be enjoyable	nunanightuq ‘it is enjoyable’ /	нунаниӷ-
nunanighqe-	pos	IPA	"to produce enjoyable music, stories, etc."	nunanighquq ‘he produced something enjoyable’ /	нунаниҳқы-
nunanipagite-	pos	IPA	to be not very enjoyable	No information given.	нунанипагиты-
nunaniq	pos	IPA	"cause of joy; enjoyable thing (music, story, etc.)"	No information given.	нунаниқ
nunaniqe-	pos	IPA	to find (it) enjoyable	No information given.	нунаниқы-
nunapallaan	pos	IPA	thumping sound	No information given.	нунаральāн
nunatu-	pos	IPA	to be roomy; to be spacious	No information given.	нунату-
nunavak	pos	IPA	walrus on ice	Tagitugmi qalghillghikun nagataqluki nunavaget takwaaput. ‘We went over to the herd of walrus on the ice by listening for the sounds they made in the fog.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 107)	нунавак
nunavalleq	pos	IPA	area of ice floe or field frequented by walruses and stained by walrus feces	see item 40 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	нунавальық
nunavghugh-	pos	IPA	to go camping by boat for an extended time	No information given.	нунавӷуӷ-
nunavghuugh-	pos	IPA	to go to a camp	"kiilqusiq nunavghuughluteng uksaaghumaan uteghnightut ‘they went to their camp and stayed there all summer, and as it was becoming fall, they came back’; uughqanun kiikun nunavghuuqumta pilghaaten ‘if we go to the camp down south next summer, you should come along’"	нунавӷӱӷ-
nungigh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nungighaghneq, nungighsiitet, nungighta, nungighte-"	нуңиӷ-
nungighaghneq	pos	IPA	drawstring tube on skin-boot	No information given.	нуңиӷаӷнық
nungighaghniisiq	pos	IPA	type of stitch	exact identification undetermined	нуңиӷаӷнӣсиқ
nungighsiitet	pos	IPA	stitches which form the tube for a drawstring around the top of a skin-boot	No information given.	нуңиҳсӣтыт
nungighta	pos	IPA	drawstring	No information given.	нуңиҳта
nungighte-	pos	IPA	to tie boot top or other clothing with a drawstring	nungightuq ‘he tied his boot-top drawstring’; nungightaa ‘he tied it’ /  	нуңиҳты-
nungyaghaq	pos	IPA	entryway to tunnel (saaygu) of semisubterranean house (nenglu)	"Saaygumun taghnughhaat mayughalghiit yugem nungyaghagneng nuugluni araamakangi, “Mayughaghpenasi!” The man peeked out of the underground house entry and said to the children who were climbing on top of the artic entry tunnel, “Don’t climb!” (SULUWET  108); = nugyaghaq; cf. nuug-"	нуӷьяӷақ
nunii-	pos	IPA	to sit very still and stare vacantly; to daydream in a trance like state	"teghtuneghmini wiin nuniigaqelghii sagpenani ‘when he gets up he doesn’t do anything at first but stares vacantly’; nuniinaqlataghtuten maketen ‘you are going to stare vacantly again, so get up now’; cf. nanglii-"	нунӣ-
Nunivagem Angliviga	pos	IPA	August	literally: 'time when the rosewort (or tundra vegetation) grows'	Нунивагым Аңливига
Nunivagem Palighviga	pos	IPA	August; September	literally: 'time when the rosewort (or tundra vegetation) turns brown'	Нунивагым Палиӷвига
nunivagsaghuq	pos	IPA	type of gull	exact identification undetermined	нунивахсяӷуқ
nunivagseghaq1	pos	IPA	tundra vegetation	No information given.	нунивахсыӷақ1
nunivagseghaq2	pos	IPA	bird type	"identified as “bullfinch of passage” for Chukotka and as “thayer’s gull” for St. Lawrence Island, but neither the bullfinch (Pyrrhula pyrrhula) nor thayer’s gull (Larus thayeri) are found in the area"	нунивахсыӷақ2
nunivak	pos	IPA	rosewort (Rhodiola atropurpurea); tundra	nunivagmeng neghtuq ‘she ate rosewort’; nunivagmi inghuuq ‘she picked berries in the tundra’; also called “kings crown” in local English	нунивак
nunivi-	pos	IPA	to gather greens	nuniviiq ‘he is gathering greens’; nunivii ‘he is gathering them’ /	нуниви-
Nunivivik	pos	IPA	August	"literally, ‘time for gathering greens’; also given in various sources as June-July, July, and July-August"	Нунививик
Nunlegran	pos	IPA	Preobrazhenie Bay and Nunligran (village) in Chukotka	"= Nunlegraq, Nunalek; well to west of Yupik area in Chukotka; see Map 1 in Appendices"	Нунлыгран
Nunlegraq	pos	IPA	Preobrazhenie Bay and Nunligran (village) in Chukotka	"= Nunlegran, Nunalek; well to west of Yupik area in Chukotka; see Map 1 in Appendices"	Нунлыграқ
"nunmaakw, nunmaak"	pos	IPA	slowly	particle;  nunmaawhaq or nunmaaggaq ‘very slowly’	"нунмāкӱ, нунмāк"
"nunmaaw-, nunmaag-"	pos	IPA	to be slow; to be sluggish	nunmaawhtuq or nunmaagtuq ‘he is slow or sluggish’ / the form with w is said to be the more conservative form	"нунмāӱ-, нунмāг-"
nunugh-	pos	IPA	to pinch; to hold between thumb and finger(s)	nunughaa ‘he pinched it’ or ‘he held it between his thumb and forefinger’ /	нунуӷ-
nunughtugh-	pos	IPA	to choke; to strangle	nunughtughaa ‘he strangled him’ /	нунуҳтуӷ-
nuqaghta	pos	IPA	spring (as in a steel trap)	Chukotkan (R)	нуқаҳта
nuqeghan	pos	IPA	bowstring	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	нуқыӷан
nuqeghsigh-	pos	IPA	to take a shortcut in order to overtake what one is pursuing	"neqeghsighaa ‘he took a shortcut in order to overtake him’ / sivuminilnguut neqeghsighluki kaatevzighii ‘he almost got to those that he was going after by taking a shortcut’; kilgaaqullghii ayumiq siivanlleghet ineghtaqiit nuqeghsighifqiita pisqelluki ‘long ago when they were running, the elders would forbid them to take shortcuts’"	нуқыҳсуӷ-
nuqete-	pos	IPA	to have fortitude; to practice self-restraint; to refrain	qiyaneghmeng nuqetuq ‘he refrained from crying’	нуқыты-
nuqnegh-	pos	IPA	to hold on (lest one fall)	nuqneghtuq ‘he's holding on’; nuqneghaa ‘he's holding on to it’ / nuqneghtaaghaa ‘he's holding on to it tightly’; nuqneghun ‘something to hold on to’	нуқньыӷ-
nuqsaleg-	pos	IPA	to almost but not quite obtain (it); to fall short	"takukani nuqsalgaa uqiighulluni ‘he almost got to his destination, but he didn’t get there because he ran out of gas’; igaghyalleni suflughtegpenaan nuqsalgaa ‘he didn’t finish his schooling, but he almost did’; cf. nuqete-"	нуқсалыг-
nuqutu-	pos	IPA	"to be wide (of clothing, openings, etc.)"	nuqutuuq ‘it is wide’ / nuqutuqaq ‘something that is wide’	нуқуту-
nuqutughte-	pos	IPA	to widen	nuqutughtuq ‘it got wider’; nuqutughtaa ‘he made it wider’ /	нуқутуҳты-
nurgu	pos	IPA	loop; noose	#NAME?	нургу
nurgu-	pos	IPA	to put a loop in something	nurguuq ‘he's putting a loop in something’; nurgaa ‘he's putting a loop in it’ / = nugru-	нургу-
nurgugtaq	pos	IPA	part of skin boat	exact identification undetermined	нургухтақ
nusug-	pos	IPA	to pull out	nusugaa ‘he pulled it out’ / nusugutaa ‘he pulled something out for her’; qikmighhaq nusugaa kiiwegneng ‘he pulled the little dog out of the river’	нусюг-
nusughagh-	pos	IPA	to pass through an area of thin ice by breaking it before one as one goes	sallegpak ngepeghtaghput pegnem nusughaghaqluta ‘we barely went all the way through the area of thin ice by breaking it’; nusughameng aningughtukut ‘we made our way through the thin ice by breaking it before us as we went along’	нусуӷаӷ-
nusugniigh-	pos	IPA	to snare; to trap	nusugniightuq ‘he is snaring or trapping’ /	нусюгнӣӷ-
nusugniighusiq	pos	IPA	snare made of baleen	"used in the plural, nusughniighusit, for one snare"	нусюгнӣӷусиқ
nusugteqaq	pos	IPA	loop (to make a knot easy to untie (as the loops made when tying a shoelace))	"nusugteqaakun sayukuvgu itemellequq ‘if you pull it by its loop it will come free’; singineghmeggni nusugteqighluki qillghutaqiit ‘when shoelaces are tied, they are tied loosely to be taken off easily’"	нусухтықақ
nutaan	pos	IPA	just now; for the first time	"particle; said when something has just now happened and usually that has been anticipated as a desired occurence; nutaan kaatuq ‘ah, he's just arrived’"	нутāн
nutagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nutaghaq, nutaghte-, nutaan, nutaqiiq"	нутаӷ-
nutaghaq	pos	IPA	new thing	nutaghaaguq ‘it is new’; nutaghastun ‘like new’	нутаӷақ
nutaghin	pos	IPA	"newly formed and thickened sea ice with a smooth surface, no pressure ridges and no snow cover"	see item 41 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	нутаӷин
nutaghlin	pos	IPA	newly formed ice that has become thick	< nutagh-?	нутаӷлин
nutaghte-	pos	IPA	to make new; to renew or be renewed; to fix up	No information given.	нутаҳты-
nutaqiiq	pos	IPA	frost snow on sea ice; new ice with frost crystals on surface	see item 42 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	нутақӣқ
nuteghaq	pos	IPA	young adult	Sivuqam nuteghaa kiyang igaghyaataquq ‘most of the young people of Saint Lawrence Island go to school’; yuuk taana nuteghaaluninguq pinipigsaghpetuq ‘it is said that that man was really good when he was a young man’	нутыӷақ
nutem	pos	IPA	like this from the beginning; always (from the beginning)	"particle; ""Waamtamken, nayagitunga avangitunga."" ""Uuk, iqlengalghiitenqun.  Nutemqun iqlengaqrulghiiten!” ‘“I’m fooling you, I don’t have a sister, I don’t have any.” “Oh, you are indeed a liar. From the beginning you’ve been some kind of liar!”’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:8)"	нутым
nutemtaq	pos	IPA	older ice floe or field with accumulated snow covering	see item 43 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	нутымтақ
"nuufik, nuuvik"	pos	IPA	eye of needle; eyelet; hole for threading	No information given.	"нӯфик, нӯвик"
nuug-	pos	IPA	"to surface (of seals, ducks); to stick one's head out through an opening"	"nuugtuq ‘it surfaced, he stuck his head out’; nuugaa ‘it surfaced at it’ / neghsam nuugaa yuuk ‘the seal surfaced near the man’; cf. nungyaghaq"	нӯг-
nuugaghte-	pos	IPA	to move suddenly; to change one's mind suddenly	nuugaghtuq ‘he made a sudden move’ /	нӯгаҳты-
nuugh-	pos	IPA	to be in need; to be unable to reach; be short of; to miss out on	nuughtuq ‘he is in need or cannot reach’; nuughaa ‘he cannot reach it’ / nuughnaghtuq ‘it is scarce’; nuughniquq ‘he is in dire need’; neqmeng nuughtuq ‘he is short of food’; mekelghiighhaam nuughaa suflugaq ‘the boy can't reach the gun’; Nenglum ulimallghanun nuughtuutkaagunga. ‘I missed out on the building of the underground houses. ’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:10)	нӯӷ-
nuughhute-	pos	IPA	to be insufficient	"nuughhutuq ‘it is insufficient, there isn't enough of it’"	нӯҳуты-
nuughqaghte-	pos	IPA	to suddenly protrude through an opening; to suddenly surface; to suddenly put one’s head through an opening	No information given.	нӯҳқаҳты-
nuughtugh-	pos	IPA	to miss (be too late for)	Yuuk iilquq tengegkayuget nuughtughluki. ‘The man was sad when he missed the airplane.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 59)	нӯҳтуӷ-
nuugpagte-	pos	IPA	to move suddenly; to change one's mind suddenly	nuugpagtuq ‘he made a sudden move’ /	нӯхпахты-
nuugte-	pos	IPA	to move	nuugtuq ‘he moved’; nuugtaa ‘he moved it’ / nuugtekan ‘if he moves’; nuugsimaaq ‘he has moved’; nuughqughtuq ‘he's moving things’	нӯхты-
nuuk	pos	IPA	surfaced seal	"see also nuug-, the nominal counterpart of this word"	нӯк
nuulgaghte-	pos	IPA	to chip the edge or tip of (it); to break off a piece from its edge or point	savini nuulgaghlluku iipgiitaa ‘he chipped the edge of his knife and it became dull’; nallemteggun sama tuvaq nuulgaghsimaa ‘the shore ice that is straight down from here broke off’	нӱлгаҳты-
nuulgun	pos	IPA	"crosspiece in roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	the crosspiece is supported by an internal pole (ayagun) and supporting roof poles (ighuluq); = guulgun	нӯлгун
nuunquta	pos	IPA	bubble(s) surfacing on the ocean from a bearded seal’s call before it surfaces after diving deep	"used in the plural, nuunqutet, for a series or mass of these bubbles; avillghwaaghem nuunqutangi esghaghluki taakwavek qiifqaghsimalghiit ‘they saw the bubbles from the bearded seal’s call, so they turned in that direction’"	нӱнқута
nuupnigh-	pos	IPA	to abate or diminish or die down temporarily (of wind)	nuupnightuq or nuupnighaa ‘the wind abated’ / anuqa nuupniqaghaqluni lliighaa ‘the wind is beginning to die down intermittently’	нӯпньиӷ-
nuuqragti-	pos	IPA	to live in poverty	"akikaghqiitem qenwat nuuqragtinganun lliightut ‘they didn’t have anything to sell, and so they started living in poverty’; neqangisagem neqmeng nuuqragtighllaguuq ‘he is living in poverty because he is out of food’"	нӯқшахти-
nuuskagllagan	pos	IPA	suddenly	particle; nuuskagllagan yuuk qinuyugumalghii ‘suddenly the man got sick’	нӯскахльяган
nuuve-	pos	IPA	to run thread through the eye of a needle (or like thing); to thread (a needle); to do something correctly (figurative usage)	nuuvaa ‘he threaded it’ / qiipaq nuuvaa sikumun ‘she ran the thread through the eye of the needle’; nuuviiq ‘he threaded something’; nuuvutaa ‘she threaded something for him’; aghnam nuuvaa aghulata ‘the woman danced correctly to the dance tune’	нӯвы-
nuuvusiq	pos	IPA	needle threader	No information given.	нӯвусиқ
nuuyvak	pos	IPA	knowledgeable elder	"nuuyvaagtekat sivukluki ungipaghsugqaghqi ‘please ask the knowledgeable elders first’; whangkunneng nuuyvaguuten enankin sivuki ‘you’re a more knowledgeable elder than we are, so you go first’"	нӱӥвак
nuvag-	pos	IPA	to drool	nuvagtuq ‘he is drooling’; nuvagaa ‘he is drooling on it’ /	нуваг-
nuvaglluk	pos	IPA	slime; fish slime	No information given.	нувахльюк
nuvagragh-	pos	IPA	to moisten with saliva	No information given.	нуваграӷ-
nuvak	pos	IPA	drool; saliva	nuvaga ‘his saliva’	нувак
nuvakataq	pos	IPA	kind of kelp	exact identification undetermined; cf. nuvak	нувакатақ
nuve-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > nuverragh-, nuvugh-,  nuuve-"	нувы-
nuverraasiq 	pos	IPA	knitting needle	No information given.	нувышāсиқ
nuverragh-	pos	IPA	to knit; to thread through	nuverraghtuq ‘she knit’; nuverraghaa ‘she knit it’ / = neverragh-	нувышаӷ-
nuvugh-	pos	IPA	to string beads	nuvughtuq ‘she strung beads’; nuvughii ‘she strung them’ / 	нувуӷ-
nuvuk	pos	IPA	point; tip	nuvugighaghtaa ‘he broke its tip’	нувук
Nuvuk	pos	IPA	site near mouth of Tkachen Bay in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Нувук
nuvukraan	pos	IPA	lace	Chukotkan (R)	нувукшāн
nuvukraasiq	pos	IPA	sewing needle	Chukotkan (R)	нувукшāсиқ
nuvukruk	pos	IPA	"point or tip of knife, needle, etc."	No information given.	нувукшук
nuvulqugnak	pos	IPA	long-necked or soft-shelled clam (called “red-tip”)	species identification undetermined	нувульқугнак
nuyaagh-	pos	IPA	to be timid; to be wary; be unapproachable (of animals)	nuyaaghtuq  ‘it is timid’ / cf. nuyughtugh-	нуя̄ӷ-
nuyaaghite-	pos	IPA	to not be timid (of animals)	nuyaaghituq ‘it is not timid’ /	нуя̄ӷиты-
nuyaq	pos	IPA	hair	"used in the singular for one person's head of hair (as is the English word ""hair""): nuyaqa taakuq ‘my hair is long’; cf. nuyileq"	нуяқ
nuyeklighpigaq	pos	IPA	the very oldest one	avaqutaqa nuyeklighpigaq ‘my very oldest son’	нуӥыкльиҳпигақ
nuyekliq	pos	IPA	older or oldest one	nuyeklighput ‘the oldest one of us’	нуӥыкльиқ
nuyiigh-	pos	IPA	to get or give a haircut	Chukotkan; nuyiightuq ‘he got a haircut’; nuyiighaa ‘he gave him a haircut’ /	нуӥӣӷ-
nuyiite-	pos	IPA	to be bald	No information given.	нуӥӣты-
nuyileq	pos	IPA	ice field that is beginning to break up with narrow open leads	see item 44 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004; cf. nuyaq	нуӥилық
nuyughtugh-	pos	IPA	to be timid; to be wary; to be shy (said of animals or people)	nuyughtughtuq ‘he or it is timid’ / cf. nuyaagh-	нуюҳтуӷ-
nuziq	pos	IPA	one's child's spouse's parent; one's child's mother-in-law or father-in-law	"nuziqagka ighneghma sakikek nalighmeng panigma sakikek ‘my nuziqs2 are my son’s mother-in-law and father-in-law, or my daughter’s mother-in-law and father-in-law’"	нузиқ
paagh-	pos	IPA	to lick clean with the tongue; to scrape with one's finger and lick off the finger; to lap with the tongue	paaghtuq ‘he licked something clean’ or ‘he/it lapped’; paaghaa ‘he licked it clean’ / paaghtuq sagneghmeng ‘he cleaned a bowl with his finger’	пāӷ-
paaghqata	pos	IPA	belt fastened criss-cross on to a long-handled dipnet	"used in the plural, paaghqatet, used for one such thing; Chukotkan (R)"	паҳата
paaghqite-	pos	IPA	to be vacant; to be unpopulated; to be without people	"paaghqituq ‘it is vacant’ / Nepiighyata aqumyalghiimi paaghqiteftuq. ‘When the voices stopped, she sat up, and there was nobody there.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:206); Qenwat qiinghaghsalghiimi mamlegllak paaghqilnguq. ‘When she looked in it was very dark and no one was there.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:206); cf. paghqilngaate-"	пāҳқиты-
paagna	pos	IPA	"that one up there, away from the water or up above; that one to the north"	"base: pag-; extended demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: pagum ‘(of) the one up there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: paagkut ‘those up there’; vocative: paagyuq ‘you up there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tespagna or espagna ‘that one up there’; localis adverb: pagani ‘up there’; terminalis adverb: pagavek ‘to up there’; vialis adverb: paaggun ‘through up there’; ablative adverb: paagken ‘from up there’; interjectional: paga ‘there (up there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tespagani or espagani ‘there, up there’; pagavek Nome-emun pilta ‘let's go north to Nome’; tengegkayuget paga aliighumaat ‘the airplane is visible up there’; naaygham minglenga paga aliightuq tagitugiisalghiimi ‘the lower part of the mountain up there can be seen now that the fog has lifted some’"	пāгна
paakw	pos	IPA	grain of wood	paawa ‘its grain’	пāӱк
paallghu	pos	IPA	"small insect found in dark, dusty or musty places"	exact identification undetermined	пāльҳу
paallitaqe-	pos	IPA	to be inconsiderate of (him)	Chukotkan; paallitaqaa ‘he is inconsiderate of her’ / paallitaqiiq ‘he is inconsiderate’	пāльитақы-
paallnaghqengwaagh-	pos	IPA	"to suffer severe loss (of loved ones, property, health, etc.); to completely run out of something; to go broke"	"qikmim neghiimakangi llimtaaghhiitneng neqmeng paallnaghqengngwaaghluki kiilqusiq neqekaghqiitneng ‘dogs had eaten their stored food so that they suffered the loss of their entire summer's supply’; ullghitangnaqluta paallnaghqengwaaghtutuk ‘buying a snowmachine really made us broke’; aamta nek taakuk paallnangqengngwaaghtuk, ighneghik qamagtuk meghmi un'gani peleghqaqlutek ‘as we know, a terrible tragedy befell that househould when both of its sons perished at sea’"	пāльнаҳқыңӱāӷ-
paamae	pos	IPA	pump	also used in Chukotka	пāмаы
paame-	pos	IPA	to pump	paamigu meq angyam samakenganeng paamesqughhaghqun taaggun uglaghivagilgan ‘pump that water out from the bottom of the boat with that little pump before the water increases too much’	пāмы-
paamkaan	pos	IPA	whaling gun with explosive projectile	also used in Chukotka	пāмкāн
paamkagh-	pos	IPA	to shoot with a whaling gun	No information given.	пāмкаӷ-
paamna	pos	IPA	that one up there; that one to the north; Chukotka from the viewpoint of St. Lawrence Island; that one behind; back of a person	"base: pam-; obscured demonstrative pronoun;  relative singular pronoun: pamum ‘(of) the one up there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: paamkut ‘those up there’; vocative: paamyuq ‘you, up there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tespamna or espamna ‘that one up there’; localis adverb: pamani ‘up there’; terminalis adverb: pamavek ‘to up there’; vialis adverb: pamagun or paamggun ‘through up there’; ablative adverb: pamaken or paamken ‘from up there’; interjectional: pama ‘up there!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tespamani or espamani ‘there, up there’; paamna naaygham qaaynga esghaghyaghtuulteggu ‘let's all go up and look around that mountain summit’; Ungaziq paamna aliighaa qilawaaghiisaqminigu ‘Chaplino (in Chukotka) is visible now that the clouds have lifted’; paamkut ‘the Siberians’; means ‘back of a person’, when used as an ordinary noun and with a possessed ending as in paamnaka kuumkaghhu ‘scratch my back please’"	пāмна
paamyuk	pos	IPA	protruberance at base of harpoon	Chukotkan (R)	пāмьюк
paangghun	pos	IPA	double-bladed paddle for kayak	Chukotkan (R); cf. pangeghte-	пāңӷун
paangghutngwaaq	pos	IPA	sorrel (Rumex beringensis or Rumex graminifolius)	No information given.	пāңӷутңӱьāқ
paani-	pos	IPA	to work on something but not to completion; to outline or rough-out ivory carving or the like	"ulimaani paanisqughluki wiin pegtii sanaluni ‘he had someone rough out his carvings, but then he put them aside to go do something else ’; paanistengngwaaqaq nanughwaaq iiglluni naalkumakanga ‘when he was digging he found a not-completed figurine of a polar bear figurine’"	пāни-
paaptaaye-	pos	IPA	to baptise	John Paaptaayesta ‘John the Baptist’ (Matthew 3.1)	пāптāӥы-
paaqngite-	pos	IPA	"to be deserted, uninhabited, empty, vacant"	"Chukotkan (R); used (only?) in the subordinative, paaqngunani ‘(it) being vacant, uninhabited’; cf. paaghqite-"	пāқңьиты-
"paara, paaraq"	pos	IPA	handlebar of sled; bar at lower back of sled	Patam iikluku kaviiq tuunaa Kanumun. Kanum qamiyem paaraakun qeputaa. ‘Pata removed the fox (from the trap) and gave it to Kanu. Kanu tied it to the handlebar of the sled.’ (UNKUS. 12)	"пāра, пāрақ"
paarghu	pos	IPA	appendix (anatomical)	Aghallegtam pilaglunga paarghuka iikaa. ‘The doctor operated one me and removed my appendix.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 131)	пāрӷу
paarghulliqe-	pos	IPA	to have appendicitis	paarghulliquq ‘he had appendicitis’ /	пāрӷульиқы-
paaskaghqaq	pos	IPA	strip of skin or fabric for top of skin-boot; edging material for use around an opening	No information given.	пāскаҳқақ
paaslaq	pos	IPA	upper part of the forearm bone	neghsam paaslaa makighhu ‘eat the meat off of the seal’s upper forearm bone’; ayveghem paaslii aangut ‘a walrus’ upper forearms are big’	пāсльақ
paasliq	pos	IPA	cuff of sleeve of garment	No information given.	пāсльиқ
paasqutaq	pos	IPA	bag made from two sealskins sewn together	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, paasqutak, for one bag"	пāсқутақ
paasqute-	pos	IPA	to face each other	"Chukotkan (R); paasqutuq malghukaghtaan qamaglluni tamaana mangteghasqwaaq ‘all the make-shift shelters are facing each other, one to one’"	пāсқуты-
paatgutaq	pos	IPA	racket-like device used in traditional game; tennis racket	#NAME?	пāтхутақ
paawagh-	pos	IPA	to peg out a sealskin on tthe ground to dry	"paawaghluku amiiraq kineghsimaa nunaaghmi ‘he pegged out a sealskin on the ground and it dried there’; niightuutngillghem paawaghluki pimiit ‘they didn’t have a drying frame, so they dried it pegging it out on the ground’"	пāӱаӷ-
paawaq	pos	IPA	sealskin pegged out on  the ground to dry	No information given.	пāӱақ
paawra	pos	IPA	baking soda	Chukotkan (R)	пāӱра
paayghaate-	pos	IPA	to break something when it is still new	ivenruutkenghhagteng paayghaasimakegket qalmesilluteng ‘they  broke the motor that they just got by running into an underwater boulder’; paayghaasaqunakek aleghquusik kelengakngwaaghlukek ‘be careful not to break the new citizen’s-band radio; take good care of it’	пāӥӷāты-
paayghaq	pos	IPA	belt made from the material on the edge of a sealskin	No information given.	пāӥӷақ
paayghutaq	pos	IPA	screw	Chukotkan (R)	пāӥӷутақ
paayngute-	pos	IPA	"to begin (a trend, activity, ceremony, etc.); to start (a trend, activity, ceremony, etc.); to open a ceremony"	"atughnaqelghiit paayngulluki unitii ‘he started the drumming for them and then left them’; ullghitangyuwhaaqaq taana paayngutikaaguq ‘he was the first one to get a snowmachine, and everyone else got them after him’"	пāңуты-
paaypelae	pos	IPA	bible	used in the plural: paaypelet ‘the Bible’	пāӥпыляы
Pagaaliit	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Пагāлӣт
Pagaliit	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Пагалӣт
pagavesengwaaq	pos	IPA	knee-high man’s skin-boot of reindeer leg	cf. pagavek (look under pagani)	пагавысыңӱāқ
pagelevzeghaq	pos	IPA	fine powder	No information given.	пагылывзыӷақ
paggaagte-1	pos	IPA	to audibly breathe hard	No information given.	пахāхты-1
paggaagte-2	pos	IPA	to be filled with air; to be bloated	"qikmit tuqutkiit aqsangit paggagteghllagumaat akuwaaghtat ‘it turns out that the dogs that they killed had bloated stomachs since days ago’; mallut paggaggneghmeggni pugleghallghi quulvaghllagaqut ‘when walrus carcasses bloat, they float really high out of the water’"	пахахты-2
paggaak	pos	IPA	windy sound; noise of wind	No information given.	пахāк
pagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > paghsi-, paghyugh-"	паӷ-
paghneq	pos	IPA	the lower part of leg under the knee	No information given.	паӷнық
paghqigh-	pos	IPA	to learn; to discover (how)	"Naten Yuuk Paghqiimaa Tengaaneghmeng ‘How Man Learned to Fly’ (title of  a certain book, Tambi 1936); paghqingllaghyaghqaawaquq ‘he must go for training’"	паҳқиҳ-
paghqilngaate-	pos	IPA	"to steal or slip away; to do, encounter or experience something when no one else is around"	"paghqilngaatuq ‘he stole away’; paghqilngaataa ‘he did it when no one else was around, he stole away with it’ / paghqilngaatuq aga yakughnamun aghulaquq whangkuta waaknaniqaamaluta ‘evidently he stole away to the hazardous place while we weren't paying attention’; paghqilngaatiiq entaqun aga suflugameng ‘he seems to have stolen away unnoticed with a gun’; mekelghiighhaak elngaatall paghqilngaataak alla mekelghiighhaq uglaalluku ‘two little boys overwhelmed another little boy when no one was around’; cf. paaghqite-"	паҳқилңāты-
paghsi-	pos	IPA	to be sleepy or to sleep soundly after being out in the fresh air	taghnughhaq qavaghtuq taakluku paghsiluni ‘the baby slept for a long time after being out in the fresh air’; paghsisighaa ‘he took him out into the fresh air so that he would be sleepy afterwards’; cf. paghyug-	паӷси-
paghyanghaghte-	pos	IPA	"to catch or get caught, force or be forced to act when one is unprepared; to rush when unprepared"	igleghqaannaqelghiit apeghiightestegpenaan paghyanghaghtaat ‘they were going to leave without letting him get ready and they made him rush’; nunmaagneghutmineng paghyanghaghtestaquq ‘because of his slowness he ends up rushing when they are going’	паӷьянӷаҳты-
paghyugh-	pos	IPA	to be tired; to be sleepy	cf. paghsi-; = peghyugh-	паӷьюӷ-
pagi-	pos	IPA	"to stay behind; to remain (to watch over things, as a survivor, etc.)"	pagiiq ‘he stayed behind’ / paginaqunga maani elpesi angyaamalusi ‘I'll stay behind while you go out with the boat’; yaywaalingiighhaq taana esgha pagilghii ima qavngaghpaggaaneng ‘that poor little orphan has remained and survived all alone for some time’	паги-
Pagileq	pos	IPA	former village at Cape Yyergyn on Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Пагилық
pagiqe-	pos	IPA	to nurse; to take care of	No information given.	пагиқы-
pagitaq	pos	IPA	inheritance; something left for someone as an inheritance; keepsake	No information given.	пагиты-
pagite-	pos	IPA	to leave as an inheritance; to keep as a keepsake of someone; to take care of for the owner when owner is away	"pagitaa ‘he left it as an inheritance’, ‘he kept it as a keepsake’, or ‘he took care of it for the owner’ / "	пагиты-
pagkwaaq	pos	IPA	area right below foothills; base of the mountains slightly higher than the plain	cf. paagna	пахкӱāқ
Pagkwaaq	pos	IPA	site near the foothills on the back side of Savoonga Mts. or Kukulget Mts.	No information given.	пахкӱāқ
pagrugaq	pos	IPA	tufted puffin (Lunda cirrhata)	No information given.	пагругақ
pagsinga-	pos	IPA	to attend; to be present; to watch something (a performance or the like); to watch stealthily (?)	pagsinganaqnaqunga atulghiinun ‘I'll try to attend the Eskimo song session’	пахсиңа-
pagugh-	pos	IPA	for there to be a ripple in the distance on the surface of the sea	No information given.	пагуӷ-
pagula	pos	IPA	dust; cloudiness in liquid	No information given.	пагуля
pagulangigh-	pos	IPA	to dust; to filter (liquid)	No information given.	пагуляңиӷ-
paguluqe-	pos	IPA	"to be murky, cloudy or dim"	Chukotkan (V&E)	пагулуқы-
paguneghqegkaq	pos	IPA	"dish of reindeer tallow, seal oil, snow and berries; Eskimo “ice cream”"	No information given.	пагуныҳқыхкақ
paguneghqutaq	pos	IPA	crowberry shrub	Chukotkan (R)	пагуныҳқутақ
pagunghangeltaq	pos	IPA	raisin	"Taakuni Ivaqaankuni rice-a, pagunghangeltaq, neqekrapik neghestekaqaat. ‘It was among that family of Ivaqaq’s that they fed one rice, raisins, and pilot bread.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:200)"	пагунӷаңыльтақ
pagunghaq*	pos	IPA	crowberry or curlewberry (Empretum nigrum or Empretum subholarcticum)	"‘blackberry’ is a local English term for this berry, but it is not the same as the commercial blackberry; pagunghaq is the term used for ‘berry’ in general as well as for Empretum nigrum specifically"	пагунӷақ
pagutet	pos	IPA	"material (usually pebbles) put under flooring of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	Chukotkan (R)	пагутыт
pakag-	pos	IPA	"to pry with a lever; to raise, push or remove part by prying"	pakagaa ‘he pried it’ / pakagluku uumga salngagllagem qelpeghsimaak ‘he opened the big box by prying off the top cover’; pakagaghsimakanga aquutam piiknanga ivenruutegneng ifkaghvikluku ‘he sheared off the top part of the rudder by dropping the motor on it’	пакаг-
pakagusiq	pos	IPA	lever	No information given.	пакагусиқ
pakeg-	pos	IPA	to flex; to bend; to fold; to be bent by old age	"pakegtuq ‘he or it bent forward’; paakgaa ‘he bent it, it (age) is making him bend over’ / paakgutigu liiqneq taana tanpeghqun ‘fold the dried walrus skin over that scrap’; cf. pakreg-"	пакыг-
pakegte-	pos	IPA	to bend or flex at a joint; to bend over forward; to roll up something	pakegtuq ‘he bend (himself) over’; pakegtaa ‘he bent it over’ / pakeglluku tanpeq unitigu ‘fold the dried walrus skin and leave it’; aghnaq aqsalilqwaaghaqaq pakeggneghmeng aghtughtuq ‘that woman in the advanced stage of pregnancy is having a hard time bending over’; pakegllunga iightunga mingllutem awatanganun ‘I bent over and hid behind the fence’; angyameng amighilghiit tanpeghhet pakegtaqiit paagnangi ilutmun enkaam putungitgun tapghaghmeng nuvughaqluki ayugitun qilleghquutaqiit angyam temangakun ‘people putting a skin covering on a boat fold the skin edges tightly over the top of the frame and fasten the folded-over part onto the ribbing by looping rope through the holes made before the skin was dried’	пакыхты-
pakemna	pos	IPA	the one up above; the up on the  mountain	"Chukotkan; base: pakem-; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: pakemkut ‘those up above’, ‘those up on the mountain’"	пакымна
pakestiya	pos	IPA	rope running from gunnel to mast of boat	also used in Chukotka	пакыстия
pakestiyaghmii	pos	IPA	"man in skin boat who throws out the first float of the harpoon line, positioned in boat behind the striker"	No information given.	пакыстияӷмӣ
pakfalla	pos	IPA	west	No information given.	пакфалья
pakig-	pos	IPA	to hook one's hand onto (it) and pull either bringing it toward oneself or pulling oneself toward it or past it; to grab much for oneself; to dismiss from the mind; to ignore or pass over	"the last two meanings are evidently figurative uses of this word much as in English one can ""brush aside"" thoughts or cares; pakigtuq ‘he hooked onto something and pulled himself forward’; pakigaa ‘he hooked onto it and pulled it’ / pakiglukek qergesek ayaqighnalghiik minglekun aangqaq tugaa tunutanganilnguq ‘he pulled on the top of the window that was  against the wall and took the ball from behind it’; pakigluni uusqalghiikun minglekun sayugumaghmi qamavenganun iteghtuq ‘he hooked his hand over the high fence and pulled himself inside’; sivuliq aghnaghaq qepghaghyulghii legan pakigluku ilangii kinguliit tugulaghiit qepghaghtenguluki ‘passing over the first girl who really wanted to work they took the others for the positions’; umyugagka temitengelghiik pakikaghlukek nenglaghtunga elngaatall ugima gginaa puyughllak nenglaghnaq esghaghluku ‘I dismissed my sad thoughts for a while when I saw my husband's funny sooty face’"	пакиг-
pakigneq	pos	IPA	greedy person; grabby person	No information given.	пакигнық
pakigniigh	pos	IPA	to get more than intended	No information given.	пакигнӣӷ-
pakigsigh-	pos	IPA	to be stepped on or pushed aside by others in their striving to get ahead	No information given.	пакихсиӷ-
pakineg-	pos	IPA	to scratch	pakinegtuq ‘he scratched himself’; pakin'gaa ‘he scratched her or it’ / pakinerewaaghluku kaneq qergesegnekun qineghllunga esghaghanka aghulaqestegpenaki ‘I scratched off the frost from the window and looked out at them before they left’	пакиныг-
pakreg-	pos	IPA	to bend; to curl; to warp; to fold	pakregtuq or pakregaa ‘it bent’ / pakregtaa ‘he bent it’; pakregngaaq ‘it is bent’; nunivak pakregaa ‘the rosewort plant is bending over’; pakregten ‘bend your knees!’; cf. pakeg-	пакшыг-
pakreghqe-	pos	IPA	to huddle up from cold; to tense up	Chukotkan (R)	пакшыҳқ-
pakregneq	pos	IPA	narrow curved neck of a dried walrus stomach; duodenum; non-anatomical elbow	suflugem pakregnegha ‘the elbow of the stovepipe’	пакшыгнық
pakrek	pos	IPA	curved carving knife	No information given.	пакшык
palagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > palaghhaghte-, palaghhaq, palaghte-, palaghyug-, palaqe-, palatun"	паляӷ-
palaghhaghte-	pos	IPA	to not get or give enough; to shorchange or be shortchanged; to decrease in amount; to become fewer	"palaghhaghsimalghiinga uulqimeng tukfighilunga taawa ‘well, I bought too few potatoes’; palaghhaghsimakangat tukfighluki kaviighi ‘they paid him less than his due when they bought his fox skins’ "	паляҳаҳты-
palaghhaq 	pos	IPA	small amount	palaghhaagut iganka ‘my books are few’; akumemeng palaghhaghmeng tuunaanga ‘he gave me only a little sugar’	паляҳақ
palaghmete-	pos	IPA	"to be small, poor or weak; to be young and helpless; to be few"	"palaghmetuq ‘it is small, helpless, weak’ / aamta palaghmetut taakut net ‘as we know, that household is poor’; palaghmellunga angyaghpak kaatkayuguyaghniiqaat tamaghhaani ayumiqullghem ‘they say that when I was small the ship used to come once a year’; elpek amiiraghpek akinga palaghmetuq ‘the price or cost of your sealskin is low’"	паляӷмыты-
palaghte-	pos	IPA	to pacify; to appease temporarily	atangan aghnaghaghhaam waran anglakek palaghsimakek naaygham minglenganun aligateghllak naayvaghusimakanga minglem tunganganun ‘the little girl's father pacified her in her wish to go to the hill by taking her to the lake near it’; anglagka waran palaghtikek ‘at least temporarily do as I want you to!’	паляҳты-
palaghute-	pos	IPA	to not get or give enough; to shorchange or be shortchanged; to decrease in amount; to become fewer	No information given.	паляӷуты-
palaghyug-	pos	IPA	to feel slighted; to feel that one hasn’t received his due	palaghyugtuq ‘he feels slighted’ / aghnaq palaghyugluni akumemeng tunusamineng ighivgaq alla aqfatuq unaamingani uglaghataghluku pingnaluni ‘the woman felt that she had gotten too little sugar yesterday so she went for more today’	паляӷьюг-
palaghyuke-	pos	IPA	to regard as insufficient or inferior	No information given.	паляӷьюкы-
palaghyuketaq	pos	IPA	"one that is rude, inconsiderate, impolite"	Chukotkan (R)	паляӷьюкытақ
palaqanin	pos	IPA	lesser; little bit; not too much	particle (?)	паляқанин
palaqe-	pos	IPA	to regard as insufficient or inferior	palaqaa ‘he feels that it isn't enough’ / yugem palaqlukek radio-squghhaak ighsakumaak kaatinaanghinnilukek uyavanun nagatusiilutek ‘he regarded the little radio as being not powerful enough to reach over long distance so he refused to take it’; palaqem angtalanganeng yaywaali mekelghiiq yugem pakigaqluku ilangi yuget tamaakut tuqlughteghumakangi ‘the man felt that the orphan boy was too frail so he ignored him calling on the other people instead’	паляқы-
palaqetagh-	pos	IPA	to not want to help out	"palaqetiilnguum kina alngunak kayusighyugluku ayuqaa ‘someone that isn’t lazy is willing to help anyone’; palaqetalghiim pingigatii ‘one that doesn’t help out, doesn’t do it’"	паляқытаӷ-
palaqiigate-	pos	IPA	to not pay attention or give consideration	Chukotkan (R)	паляқӣгаты-
palatun	pos	IPA	a little at a time	No information given.	палятун
paligh- 	pos	IPA	to turn autumn colors; to suntan; to ripen	"palightuq or palighaa ‘it turned autumn colors, he suntanned’ / nunivagsaghaq palighaa ‘the vegetation turned yellow, red, and brown’"	палиӷ-
palighte-	pos	IPA	to fade; to (sun)tan	"palightuq ‘it faded, he got tanned’; palightaa it ‘(the sun) turned it autumn colors’ or ‘it (sun)tanned him’; upenghami siqineghllugmi palighqwaataqaa an'gituqat ‘in the springtime sun those who stay out a lot get very suntanned’ /"	палиҳты-
Palighvik	pos	IPA	August; September	"literally, ‘time when vegetation turns to autumn colors’; also given in one source as July"	палиӷвик
paliqaq	pos	IPA	(sun)tanned thing	paliqaq vegaaq ‘dried straw’	палиқақ
palleg-	pos	IPA	"to brush off snow, dirt or spiritual contamination"	"pallegtuq ‘he brushed himself off’, or ‘he brushed something’; paallgaa ‘he brushed her or it (garment) off’ / ayumiq Yupiget paallgaqegkangit seghleliilleghqaq ellmeggneng yughamsugumaghmeng ‘long ago the Yupik people brushed off bad spirits from themselves as they said their prayers’; cf. alleg-"	пальыг-
pallnaghqe-	pos	IPA	to end; to be worn out; to be exhausted	Chukotkan (V&E)	пальнаҳқы-
palluggnaq	pos	IPA	rough water	No information given.	пальюхнақ
pallugte-	pos	IPA	to thrash around in the water; to toss and turn in one's sleep	pallugtuq ‘he or it is thrashing around’ / palluglleghhii yuuk esghaghaqa meghmi ‘I saw a person struggling in the water’; pallugtuq mekelghiighhaq unulqusiq repall talligmineng gginamkun tenpaaghaghaanga ‘the little boy was so restless last night that he kept hitting my face with his arms as he tossed and turned’	пальюхты-
palngeri-	pos	IPA	to attend an event; to go and check on an event	atulghiinunnguq palngerinaqut ‘they are going to go attend the singing session’	палңыри-
palughtaq	pos	IPA	sea otter (Enhydra lutris); beaver (Castor canadensis)	"this animal is rarely found in the Yupik area, and not on St. Lawrence Is."	палюҳтақ
palutaq	pos	IPA	brace (as used in making a skin boat)	No information given.	палутақ
palutigh-	pos	IPA	to brace	"tiintam minglengi unaghsimeng palutighluteng ayuqut ‘the tent’s walls are braced with sticks’; uullghaghhnayukata palutightughiit ‘just in case they roll, they were braced’"	палутиӷ-
pama-	pos	IPA	to flicker (of flame); to be disheveled (of hair)	anuqataghaam pamastaa naniq ‘the draft made the lamp flicker’; nuyani sangan pamasteghllagtagu? ‘why did he let his hair get so disheveled?’	пама-
pamyughaq	pos	IPA	tailbone; coccyx	pamyughani ayemtaa iquluni ‘he broke his tailbone by falling’	памьюӷақ
pana	pos	IPA	spear	No information given.	пана
pana-	pos	IPA	to spear; to sting (of bee)	vegtaaghem panaaqaa yuuk ‘the bee is stinging the man’	пана-
panaaghaq	pos	IPA	"toy, little or makeshift spear; peg used to anchor to the ice a walrus carcuss in water"	No information given.	панāӷақ
panalghuta	pos	IPA	side pole in summer tent	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, panalghutek, for one pole"	паналӷута
panasiigh-	pos	IPA	to prepare spear for striking	No information given.	панасӣӷ-
panegh-	pos	IPA	to starve to death; to burn; to burn up	paneghtuq ‘he starved to death’ or ‘it burned (up)’; paanghaa ‘it burned (up)’ / paneghsighaa ‘he starved it/him’; paanghumaaq ‘he has starved’; paneghtaqsaghiit tuqukam aatkiillu saghyangillu qamagluki ‘long ago they used to burn up all of the clothing and other belongings of one who had died’	паныӷ-
paneghte-	pos	IPA	to burn (it); to fry or stir-fry (it)	"paneghtaa ‘he burned, fried or stir-fried it’ / paneghtiiq ‘he burned or (stir-)fried something’"	паныҳты-
panelleq	pos	IPA	ash; burned spot; scar from burning	No information given.	паныльық
pangaleg-	pos	IPA	to run on four legs (of animals) with front legs hitting the ground simultaneously	pangalegtuq ‘it ran’ /	паңалыг-
pangalegti-	pos	IPA	to go fast with dogteam	pangalegtiiq ‘he went fast’ /	паңалыхти-
pangalgusiq	pos	IPA	snow-machine	"slang; used in the dual, pangalgusik, for one snow-machine"	паңалгусиқ
pangalwaagh-	pos	IPA	to trot	No information given.	паңалӱāӷ-
pangeghte-	pos	IPA	to take a trip to Chukotka from St. Lawrence Is.	pangeghtuq ‘he took a trip to Chukotka’ / pangeghhnaqukut ‘we are going to take a trip to Chukotka’; cf. pangeq	паңыҳты-
pangeq	pos	IPA	visitor from Chukotka to St. Lawrence Is.	"Ellnginaamta naten pangeghtukut, paangghet maliglluki. ‘We were the only ones form here  how went to Chukotka accompanying the visitors from Chukotka [on their way home].’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:108); cf. pangeghte-"	раңық
pangquqe-	pos	IPA	to go check on; to pay a visit to; to check the ones left behind	qavngaghhaaneng nengyuun pangquqaghsigasigu? ‘how long has it been since you paid a visit to your grandmother?’; pangquqnaqaput angyat aviilnguut ‘we are going out to check on the boat that hasn't come back in yet’	паңқуқы-
panigkaq	pos	IPA	stepdaughter; adopted daughter	No information given.	панихкақ
panignaq	pos	IPA	favorite daughter	"Elngaatall agghiyugneghllak, ama aaghhneghllugllak. Angayuqani, anglegutnillu pinighqesiigalkangi. Naqam panignaghllak. ‘She was very strong-willed and stubborn. She didn’t act well toward her parents and her siblings. This was a consequence of the fact that she was the favorite daughter.’ (KIILUUQ 1)"	панигнақ
panik	pos	IPA	daughter	paniga ‘his daughter’; panilguunga ataasimeng ‘I have one daughter’	паник
panilqusiq	pos	IPA	daughter  (12-16 years of age)	Chukotkan (V&E)	панильқусиқ
paninang	pos	IPA	still; more	"particle; Upenghaagunguq, ughukestaghaqa paninang nalighnegha anigulwaaqluni, ‘It is said that it is spring, the snow was melting, and there was still snow in some areas,’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:14); Iteghyalghiiminguq nengyughhaa paninang qavaghaqeftuq. ‘When he went inside his little grandmother was still sleeping.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:14)"	панинаң
paniraaq	pos	IPA	daughter from a temporary wife	Chukotkan (R)	панирāқ
panqallag-	pos	IPA	to char; to smolder; to scorch; to singe	"nuyan panqallagaa, uyavaghqaaghi ‘your hair is becoming scorched, move further away’; leghlleghem melquvleghaa siipneq panqallaglluku ikughhu gaaghvagilgavgu ‘singe off the remaining fine fuzz from the goose before you cook it’"	панқальяг-
panqugni-	pos	IPA	to complain of having little in order to evoke pity	No information given.	панқугни-
panquugni-	pos	IPA	to pretend to be poorer than one is; to be stingy	Chukotkan (V&E)	панқугни-
panrengi-	pos	IPA	to get closer to see what is happening	"atulghiinun panrengiighsaquma ‘I should go watch the drumming’; esnami igleghteghngaaghmi sangwaa iigna panrengitkesaqminigu neghsaq mallu ‘while he was travelling along the shore, he got closer to something that he saw and found out it was a seal carcass’"	панрыңи-
panrengi-	pos	IPA	to look more closely at something	No information given.	панрыңи-
papa	pos	IPA	pepper	"also used in Chukotka; used in the dual, papak, for pepper in, and with, the pepper container"	папа
papaghnaq	pos	IPA	boiled dried meat stored with fat in sealskin bag in preparation for winter	Chukotkan (R); cf. papi	папаӷнақ
papalghutaq	pos	IPA	pepper shaker or other container	"used in the dual, papalghutak, for one container"	папалӷутақ
papallugh-	pos	IPA	to twitch; to fidget; to act excitedly	"papallughtuq ‘it twitched, fidgeted, acted excitedly’ /"	папальюӷ-
papasqitagh-	pos	IPA	to move tail back and forth (of a fish (or whale?))	No information given.	папасқитаӷ-
papasquq	pos	IPA	fish tail; narrow end of baleen	papasqwa ‘its tail’; cf. papek	папасқуқ
papeghaq	pos	IPA	hill alongside a moutain	"Chukotkan (R,V&E); cf. papek"	папыӷақ
papek	pos	IPA	tail of land mammal	paapga ‘its tail’	папык
papekullutaq	pos	IPA	tail of bird	"Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, papekullutat, for one tail"	папыкульютақ
papelek	pos	IPA	wolf (shaman’s word)	Chukotkan (R); literally ‘one with a tail’	папылык
paperaghte-	pos	IPA	to wag the tail; to swish the tail	Chukotkan; = paperagti-	папыраҳты-
paperegte-	pos	IPA	to wag the tail; to swish the tail	Chukotkan; = paperagti-	папырыты-
papgiiraq	pos	IPA	one with a short tail or no tail	Chukotkan (R)	папхӣрақ
papi	pos	IPA	dried seal meat that had been cooked and stored in a sealskin poke with seal oil	"ayumiq kagpagnaqneghmegteki ilangi nefkumeng papiqegkangit ‘in the old days when they stored their dried seal meat, they would put them in sealskin pokes with seal oil’; cf. papaghnaq"	пани
paprangi	pos	IPA	vigor; quickness	siivanlleghet paprangi ivaqayugaat anglinghhani awen sami piyaqniighmi angyami taayughqemmi aneghneghqutkennalghiit qepgharakegtat ‘the elders usually look for quickness in young men as it is an asset when confronting danger while hunting at sea’	папшаңи
paprangite-	pos	IPA	"to be quick, vigorous or active; to move fast"	paprangituq ‘he moves fast’ / paprangilnguut unitiituut aqfaqumi ‘active people win the races’	папшаңиты-
papri-	pos	IPA	to fidget	cf. paprangi	папши-
paqna-	pos	IPA	apprehensive; wary of danger; worried; concerned	"emotional root; paqnakaa ‘he is apprehensive of the danger he (another) might be in, worried about him’; paqnanaghtuq ‘he is in a worrisome position’; paqnayugtuq ‘he feels endangered’; paqnakluku sikunghhaq unitaa salin sigugruganeng ‘being apprehensive of its danger he left the fresh sea ice which looked dark and somewhat transparent’; paqnanaghtuq meghem un'gum sikunga qanigughneghhaanghani ‘the sea ice is particularly dangerous right after a snowfall’"	пақньа-
paqnamiqe-	pos	IPA	to escape or barely avoid peril; to warn or frighten one so that he will avoid peril 	paqnamiquq ‘he barely avoided peril’; paqnamiqaa ‘he warned or frightened him into avoiding peril’	пақньамиқы-
paqnan	pos	IPA	weapon; protection	No information given.	пақньан
paqnasigh-	pos	IPA	to come to someone’s aid to prevent injury	No information given.	пақньасиӷ-
paqniite-	pos	IPA	to be foolhardy; to take chances	No information given.	пақньӣты-
paqugaghte-	pos	IPA	to come off	"tuguta iiknaqluku paqugaghsimakanga maayghaaghan tungangakun ‘when he tried to take off the ivory tusk, it came off at the base’; ayumiq uyghaget savigtaghqat paqugaghtaghluki paanistaqiit ‘long ago, when they made knives, they would use stone flaking it first’; neghighluku uyghaget savigtaghqat paqugaghtaghluki paanistaqiit ‘years ago rocks were split and shaped for knives’"	пақугаҳты-
paqumiyug-	pos	IPA	to be wary of and hesitate to act due to threatening weather	"anuqataghaaghhnayukagu paqumiyugluteng angyallghisimalghiit ‘they thought it might be getting windy, so they held off and decided not to go boating’; paqumiyugluni uteghsimalghii tevraneng pagkengughsagu ‘being wary of threatening weather he came back in from hunting on the ice because the wind was blowing out to sea from the shore’"	пақумиюг-
para	pos	IPA	butter	also used in Chukotka; Neqekranglliit parameng piiqluteng. Elngaatall kepsughluta neghluta. ‘The bread was spread with butter. We ate until we were very full.’ (PANGEGH. 33)	пара
paraaghniigh-	pos	IPA	to ask for (needed item(s))	"tuquuqanka nuulghiit aatak uvilighnemnnun paraaghniiqaghlanga ‘I’m running short on nails, so I’m going to go ask our neighbors for some ’; paraaghniighlunga llaaghanwha pikengunga ‘I asked for some, indeed, I got some’"	парāӷнӣӷ-
paseghaq	pos	IPA	frost on skin boat	No information given.	пасыӷақ
paseraq	pos	IPA	edible root type	Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined	пасырақ
pasike-	pos	IPA	to blame; to find fault with; to accuse	pasikaa ‘he blamed her’ /	пасикы-
pasineq	pos	IPA	frame; body; window frame	pasingha ‘its frame’	пасинық
pasingatke-	pos	IPA	to be interested in	ellngan pasingatkaqaa qepghaq angyaghpagmi ‘he is interested in the work of ships’	пасиңаткы-
pasinguk	pos	IPA	area of face to the side of the nose near the nostril	aghnam taam pasingugkek kavighllaguuk ‘that woman's nose area is all red’	пасиңук
pasketae	pos	IPA	basket	Enkaam qerngughlluki imiqiit qula maalghuk siipneqluku pasketet siipneghitneng tallimat neqekrangllat. ‘And they filled twelve baskets with the remainer of the five loaves.’ (John 6.13)	паскытаы
pasleghhughagh-	pos	IPA	to hint to be given something	pasleghhughalghii aqupileghyagulluku tuunumakanga ‘they got tired of him hinting around so they gave him some’	паслзыҳуӷаӷ-
paslitaq	pos	IPA	wedge for splitting wood	No information given.	пасльитақ
patag-	pos	IPA	to pat lightly; to knock on something	cf. pateg-	патаг-
patagagh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly pat or knock; clap	patagalghii qakemna qelpeghutigu ‘open the door for whoever it is that is knocking out there’	патагаӷ-
patala	pos	IPA	however it wasn't possible to do as asked	particle; manimeng aapfiksaghaanga patala ‘he asked me for money but I didn't have any’	паталя
patalaa-	pos	IPA	to be in desperate need	patalaalhii uquqraggiinnilukek egllugteng uqungusimkanga ‘she was in desperate need of stove oil so he bought her some’	паталā-
pateg-	pos	IPA	to hit with palm of hand; to slap	paatgaa ‘he slapped it or him’ / paatgu qikmiq taana neghnaqii neqet ‘slapped that dog that is about to eat the food’; avlaawaataq paatgaa qevuulluku repall avlaawa tengaasluku alngunak ‘he slapped the flour sack hard enough that a cloud of flour rose in the air’; cf. patag-	патыг-
pategh-1	pos	IPA	to drain; to dry up; to evaporate; to be exhausted or tired	pateghtuq ‘it dried up’ / meq ellngaqayugem qulmesiitem taam imaqsaqanga paatghumaaq ‘the water that was in that pot that leaks has all drained out’; ellnga paatghumaaq aqnim ‘he is exhausted from pain’	патыӷ-1
pategh-2	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > pateghneq, pateghtu-"	патыӷ-2
pateghneq	pos	IPA	width	No information given.	патыӷнық
pateghte-	pos	IPA	to absorb	Chukotkan (R)	патыҳты-
pateghtu-	pos	IPA	to be wide	pateghtuuq ‘it is wide’ / ulluviiq taana pateghtuuqlu umuuqlu ‘that board is wide and thick’; pateghtulkelluku unaghsiq unitaa ‘he considered the log to be too wide so he left it’	патыҳту-
pateghtutala	pos	IPA	width	No information given.	патыҳтуталя
pategmig-	pos	IPA	to drive off by slapping	Chukotkan (R); mekelghiighem pategmigaqii sugrugpallengenghat (sugukelengiighet) ‘the boy is driving off the mosquitoes by slapping at them’	патыгмиг-
pateq	pos	IPA	marrow; core of tree or plant; graphite of pencil	Quyngim paatghaneng saghnaanga gaaghusighqameng. ‘I saved some reindeer marrow for cooking.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 128)	патық
patgutaq	pos	IPA	racket-like device used in traditional game; tennis racket	#NAME?	патхутақ
pati-	pos	IPA	to crack bones and eat the marrow within	una ighu patinaqaqa ‘I'm going to crack this legbone for the marrow’	пати-
patilngu-	pos	IPA	to ache (of  bone)	talligni patilnguniiqaak ‘he says that his arm-bones are hurting’	патилңу-
patime-	pos	IPA	to flap wings while on the surface of the water	"patimuq ‘it is flapping its wings’ / Meghqun nalugigalnguq, alingruughtuq.  Sanitmun patimllaluni quutmun uugtuq. ‘Having never landed in the water he was terrified. He flapped his wings until he got up on dry land.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:234)"	патимы-
patimlla-	pos	IPA	to flap wings at intervals	patimllaaq ‘it is flapping its wings at intervals’ / 	патимлья-
patug-	pos	IPA	to become covered with a sheet of ice	patugtuq or patugaa ‘it got covered with ice’ /	патуг-
patugnaq	pos	IPA	frosty weather; freezing rain	No information given.	патугнақ
patuk	pos	IPA	crust of frost	No information given.	патук
pawiilae	pos	IPA	butt of gun	Chukotkan (R)	паӱӣлаы
payaaqae	pos	IPA	calf of leg; woman's fancy knee-high bleached sealskin boot	No information given.	пая̄қаы
payaaqe-	pos	IPA	to put on or wear woman's fancy knee-high bleached sealskin boot	No information given.	пая̄қы-
payae1	pos	IPA	"outer part edge of opening; mouth of river, den or passageway; area near entrance; hatch of kayak; opening"	"paaynga or payangani ‘at its mouth or opening’; dual, payek, often used for one opening especially when unpossessed; Kiiwegnun kaalluta payek aghqestaaghhaaftuk iveghluta aghvightukut. ‘When we got to the river the mouth evidently was shallow and so we crossed by wading.’ (Akiingqwagh. 116); Ayapghaatak aanneghmeng aghtughagka, qayughllak paaskek kagpestaapiguuk. ‘I couldn’t put on the mittens because their cuffs were too narrow.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 71)"	паяы1
payae2	pos	IPA	dipnet made of baleen	Chukotkan (R); cf. payae1	паяы2
Payaghutfak	pos	IPA	site on coast north from Powooiliak on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Паяӷутфак
payangite-	pos	IPA	for St. Lawrence Islanders to be visiting (Chukotka) or for Chukotkans to be visiting (St. Lawrence Island); people come over from the other side	payangituq ‘the St. Lawrence Islanders are here (in Chukotka)’ or ‘the Chukotkans are here (in St. Lawrence Island)’; Elngaatall upenghaanneghani payanginneghani naavghutkayugyugaghtuuq liisalghiinga. ‘I recall that whenever it was spring there would be lots of trading whenever people came over from the other side.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:16)	паяңиты-
payegh-	pos	IPA	to meet partway; to go to meet or to help (someone approaching the house or the village)	"paayghaa ‘he met her partway’ / paayghiiq ‘he is met someone partway’; paayghutuk ‘they2 met each other partway’; payeghnaqaqa, akmagllagluni ayuquq ‘I am going out to meet him as he is carrying a large bag’; paasghu ‘go meet and help him’"	паӥыӷ-
payeghmun	pos	IPA	against the grain; facing eachother	particle	паӥыӷмун
payghiiqute-	pos	IPA	to challenge in a spear throwing contest	No information given.	паӥӷӣқуты-
payghumiigh-	pos	IPA	to go towards each other	"panallghiinnguq uutqiighulluteng enraq payghumiighusimalghiit ‘it is said that when they challenged each other with spears, they would go backwards, and then they would walk towards each other’; piiqiit, aghveghem qiivluki payghumiighii ‘they say that the whale turned and it (and the boat) went towards each other’; cf. payegh-"	паӥӷумӣӷ-
payugte-1	pos	IPA	to go check on (him/her) concerning (his/her) well-being	payugtaa ‘he checked on her’ / payugtiiq ‘he checked on someone’	паюхты-1
payugte-2	pos	IPA	to raise the head from a lying position	payuglluni esghapagaa tugutaa amigem saam amakenganeng qiipekestaqanga ‘he raised his head and watched the doorknob slowly turn from the outside’	паюхты-2
payukagh-	pos	IPA	to check briefly; to look in on	No information given.	паюкаӷ-
payukagh-	pos	IPA	to raise one’s head and then lower it	No information given.	паюкаӷ-
paywaaqe-	pos	IPA	"to feel hesitant, frustrated or hopeless due to anticipated difficulties"	paywaaquq ‘he feels hesitant to try’ /	паӥӱāқы-
paywaaqeke-	pos	IPA	"to feel hesitant, unsure, frustrated or hopeless about (it)"	"payuwaaqekaa ‘he feels hesitant, unsure, hopeless about it’ /"	паӥӱāқыкы-
Pegetkaq	pos	IPA	Kookoolik Hill on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Пыгыткақ
peggaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to stay up late	peggaghtughtuq kakinaluni ‘she stayed up late to sew’	пыхаҳтуӷ-
pegge-	pos	IPA	to stay awake all night	pegguq ‘he stayed up all night’ /	пыхы-
peggusiq	pos	IPA	clothing not worn at night	Chukotkan (R); perhaps meaning clothing not usually worn for sleep	пыхусиқ
pegh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > peghlaaghwaq, peghlegh-, peghte-"	пыӷ-
peghh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > peghhigh-, peghhuq"	пыҳ-
peghhe-	pos	IPA	to squat down (and give up) from exhaustion or cold	"igleghlleghhiit taakluku, taagani qenwat ataasiq peghhuq ‘they were traving a long distance, finally one of them gave up because he was tired’"	пыҳы-
peghhigh-	pos	IPA	to wash one’s hands	peghhightuq ‘he washed his (own) hands’; peghhighaa ‘he washed his (another's) hands’ / peghhii! ‘wash your hands!’	пыҳиӷ-
peghhiisiq	pos	IPA	"hand washing implement such as towel, water or soap"	peghhiisiiguq meq taana ‘that water is for washing hands’; una veglluk peghhiisiiwalluu? ‘is this towel for hand-washing too?’	пыҳӣсиқ
peghhuq	pos	IPA	"moist grime (such as dirt, oil, blood or grime from food)"	peghhughtuuq ‘he has lots of grime (on his hands)’	пыҳуқ
peghhuughqe-	pos	IPA	to get one's hands dirty	peghhuughquq neqekrangllaghyaghqameng akuulluni ‘she got her hands dirty when making dough for biscuits’	пыҳӯҳқы-
peghlaaghwaq	pos	IPA	traditional men's contest where competitors crouch down and jump to a drumbeat until exhausted	No information given.	пыӷля̄ӷӱақ
peghlegh-	pos	IPA	to squat; to collapse; to be bent or stiff from cold; to be paralyzed in the legs	"peghleghtuq ‘he squatted’, ‘it is bent from the cold’ / tiintat peghleghtut nunmaawhaq ‘the tent collapsed slowly’; atkuk tawatengwaaq kumlaaghqegkaq aalluni ayuqelghiistun ughugutkelluku peghleghtuq ‘the stiffly frozen parka that looks as though it were a person is collapsing as it thaws’; iiggenka peghleghtut ‘my fingers are stiff from the cold’; peghleghlluni iighaghtuumalghii ‘he bent down and stayed hidden’"	пыӷлыӷ-
peghleghte-	pos	IPA	to become numb	sapeghhnam peghleghsimii ellngan iiggi ‘the extreme cold caused his hands to become numb’	пыӷлыҳты-
peghneq	pos	IPA	place where bending occurs; joint; inside of joint	No information given.	пыӷнық
peghqigh-	pos	IPA	to study; to practice; to train; to learn	peghqightuq ‘he trained’ / peghqightaa ‘he trained her’; peghqiimaaq ‘he is trained’; taghnughhaat peghqightut sukalluteng elngaatall igaghyami whani kiyaghlleghmi ‘children learn quickly how to live in school here’	пыҳқиӷ-
peghqigsagh-	pos	IPA	to train; to practice; to drill	Tawatetkaagut pingayuneng qavaghlluki peghqighaqut peghqigsaqanka. ‘For three days they practiced; I trained them.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:90)	пыҳқихсяӷ-
peghqiiraagh-	pos	IPA	to fold over several times	"aghvigat aatkat peghqiiraaghluki llilaghtughii ‘she folded the washed clothes a few times and put them away’; kangsughnayukan peghqiiraaghluku kanaghtaa ‘in case it wouldn’t fit, she folded it a few times and put it in’"	пыҳқӣрāӷ-
peghqiiragh-	pos	IPA	to fold over and over	No information given.	пыҳқӣраӷ-
peghqinegh-	pos	IPA	to be wise; to be clever	peghqinghutmineng yugem taakut teglegughtet tugulaghtestii maateghaq umiilegnun ‘by being very clever that person enabled the authorities to quickly catch the thieves’; peghqiniqutkaa ‘he turned his cleverness toward accomplishing it’	пыҳқиныӷ-
peghqinelleq	pos	IPA	wisdom	used in Bible translation	пыҳқиныльық
peghqineq	pos	IPA	wise or clever person or animal	No information given.	пыҳқинық
peghqiniqe-	pos	IPA	to be sly; to be tricky	No information given.	пыҳқиниқы-
peghqipaari-	pos	IPA	to become expert	No information given.	пыҳқипāри-
peghte-	pos	IPA	to fold over; to bend over	peghtuq ‘he bent over’; peghtaa ‘he bent it over / aghnalqwaaghllakat kiyang peghngaghmeng igleghtaqut ‘elderly women usually walk bent over; peghtaa igaq qukaakun ‘he folded the paper over in the middle’; maalghugegneng peghtigu ‘fold it twice’	пыҳты-
peghtu-	pos	IPA	overwhelmed	emotional root: peghtukaa ‘he feels overwhelmed by it’; peghtuyugtuq ‘he feels overwhelmed’; peghtunaghtuq ‘it is overwhelming’; aghnam esghaghluku anengaghmi ighnegha esghiigalkenni ima aawhkaghhaaneng elgnaatall peghtukamakanga ‘when the lady saw her brother's son whom she had not seen for some time she was overcome by emotion seeing how much he had grown’	пыҳту-
peghu-	pos	IPA	to bury; to inter; to cover over (especially with earth or snow)	peghwaa ‘he buried it’ / peghuluki tuqukat kiyang lliighumiit maaten taakwani nunamillu ‘they bury the dead (rather than treating them in other ways) mostly now in that place too’; siiflukek pughukek unkusek anigukun qepghapafqaayek tepeluughqepaglleqagken kaviighet naaghyakumegteggu tepelluk awavaghsaghwaaghllequt ‘set the trap and put it in the dug out spot in the snow and bury it without handling it too much since that would make it smell strange and foxes would avoid it’	пыӷу-
peghwaaghi-	pos	IPA	to bury food to age or store it	No information given.	пыӷӱāӷи-
peghwaaq	pos	IPA	something buried or covered; something stored or aged underground	peghwaaghet uksaaq tepat saghnaaghenka taginnaqanka ‘I am going to bring out the sea vegetables that were buried under the sand last fall’; neqem ilangi peghwaaghwaaqut neqnitun aghyiisqelluku ‘some foods are buried so that they'll age and become tasty’; sangufta taana peghwaaq aliighqegkaat? ‘what was that buried thing they unearthed?’	пыӷӱāқ
peghyi	pos	IPA	snowdrift on the way after a storm	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	пыӷӥи
peghyugh-	pos	IPA	to be tired; to be sleepy	Chukotkan (R); = paghyugh-	пыӷьюӷ-
peglleghqe-	pos	IPA	to separate fighting people or animals	= peglleghqute-	пыхльыҳқы-
peglleghqute-	pos	IPA	to separate fighting people or animals	"peglleghqutuk pillugullutek ‘after fighting they2 disengaged from each other’; Piyaalghiinga, pillugutaqeftuk  kayngek. Tagnelghii  enkaam qatelghii. Upughpenanga, peglleghqutagka. ‘As I was out taking a walk, there were two bears fighting. A dark one and a light one. Without quavering I separated them.’ (AANGHHAQ 39); = peglleghqe-"	пыхльыҳқуты-
pegnefqagh-	pos	IPA	to almost finish or do something	college-valleni uumi upenghami pegnefqaghaa kaspugemmeng ‘she almosed finished college this spring’	пыгныфқаӷ-
pegnefqe-	pos	IPA	to miss but not by much; to almost hit the spot at which one is aiming	"angyat aghveghmeng pegnefqaasimalghiit ‘a boat almost got to a whale (to strike it)’; yugem naagsani pegnefqaquluku qenwat unakumakanga ‘a man kept on almost hitting his target, then finally he hit it’"	пыгныфқы-
pegnem	pos	IPA	with great difficulty; just barely	"particle; nasaperani ifkaghyan meghmun pegnem tugumakanga ‘when his cap fell into the water he retrieved it with great difficulty’; pegnem igaa aliituq ‘its design barely shows’; Tuqusaqegka nanughrukutaaghllak, uqigllak pegnem neveghtekaqaqa. ‘When I killed it, (it turned out that) it was a really big one. It was very heavy, I barely and with difficulty was able to lay on its back.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:176) "	пыгным
pegte-	pos	IPA	to release; to let go; to divorce; to set free	"pegtuq ‘it got free, came loose’; pegtaa ‘he released it, let it go, set it free’ / tapghaq pegtigu! ‘let go of the rope!’; angyat pegtut sikumeng ‘the boat came free of the ice’; pegtaa uyughani mekelghiighhaq tasluqsaqenni ‘he let go his little brother's hand which he'd been holding’; nuliini pegtaa ima siivanlleghet akuziteghngaatni ‘he divorced his wife despite the elders advising against it’"	пыхты-
pegtirake-	pos	IPA	to not take care of; to not look after; to neglect	cf. pegte-	пыхтиракы-
pegtunaq	pos	IPA	much	"Chukotkan (R,V&E); particle"	пыхтунақ
pegya-	pos	IPA	to leave unattended; to forget; to leave behind accidentally; to lose	mekelghiighhaam ayapghaatagni pegyamakek ‘the little boy carelessly left his mittens behind and forgot where they were’; pegyaa an'giitkani ‘she wandered off from the child about the one (the child) she had taken outside’; cf. puygu-	пыгья-
pegyeghqe-	pos	IPA	to expose to public view; to bring into the open; to reveal; to throw into disarray	puughtimallgha sukalluku pegyeghqumakangat ‘the fact that he cheated was quickly revealed’; tafsini sayugluku sayugaatagneng esqamna imma sayugaatam pegyeghqeghllagumakanga ‘when he pulled his belt out of his drawer he threw everything inside the drawer into disarray’	пыгӥыҳқы-
pekagh-	pos	IPA	to pant; to gasp; to suffocate; to be out of breath; to down	aqfaatepagluni pekaghtuq elngaatall ‘he ran so hard that he is really panting’; agepsum pekaghlluku tuqusimakanga ‘he died by being suffocated by smoke’	пыкаӷ-
pekaghyug-	pos	IPA	to have trouble breathing	No information given.	пыкаӷьюг-
peke-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > pekeqe-, pekete-, pekfig-, pekighqu-, peksag-, peksigaghte-, pekuutaq"	пыкы-
pekeqaaq	pos	IPA	type of sweet-tasting root	exact identification undetermined; cf. qakeqaaq	пыкықāқ
pekeqe-	pos	IPA	to carelessly dig; to mess up the ground; to unearth (literally or figuratively)	pekeqaa ‘he dug it (ground or object) up’ / pekeqiiq ‘he dug around’; nutagham igleghusim pekeqellgha nunameng tumemeng siivanlleghet qivghukepigtaat ‘the elders are upset over the pathways which have become all dug up by modern vehicles’; peghukaq pekeqaa taakwna egtelleq ‘he dug up the trash that was burried’; pekeqaat aksaqegkaaq tamaana ima sukalluku ‘they are quickly uncovering the secret’	пыкықы-
pekete-	pos	IPA	to shovel; to fire from work	peketuq ‘he shoveled something’; peketaa ‘he shoveled it’ or ‘he fired her’ /	пыкыты-
pekfig-	pos	IPA	to ransack; to dig around in	"pekfigtuq ‘he dug around’; pekfigaa ‘he is dug around in it, ransacking it’ / teglengalghiit pekfiglagluku mangteghaa aghnalqwaaghem unisimakangat unuk ‘thieves ransacked the old woman's house last night and left it a mess’; = pukfig-"	пыкфиг-
pekighqu-	pos	IPA	to dig around in things; to yank	No information given.	пыкиҳқу-
pekneq	pos	IPA	sweet-tasting tuber of tall cottongrass plant (Eriophorum angustifolium). taken from mouse (vole) caches	pekneghniighyaatet aga tutmaghwaaghaqeftut ‘the people who went gathering sweet tubers are searching for mouse caches by feeling with their feet (to locate hollow places under the ground)’	пыкньық
peksag-	pos	IPA	to scatter things	Chukotkan; peksagtuq ‘he scattered things ‘/ 	пыксяг-
peksigaghte-	pos	IPA	to rip apart; to pull apart; to pry apart; to break up snow or ground	"Tuunyatni ugatanganun aglaghluni mingla siklaghyaqenni allaghhiinaq tangiqaq peksigaghsimakanga. ‘When she had distributed  them, she went toward the exit, dug into the wall with the pick, and pried out all sorts of edible greens.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 152)"	пыксигаҳты-
pekug-1	pos	IPA	to disperse quickly	questioned	пыкуг-1
pekug-2	pos	IPA	to become fully awake; to become alert from a groggy state	pekugtuq ‘he became fully awake’ / pekugtaa ‘he woke her up fully’; qavaghninguyalghiinga ima pekugtunga jet-et naghughsinkut ‘I was sleepy but I became fully awake when the jet plane passed over us’	пыкуг-2
pekuutaghraak	pos	IPA	northern shoveler duck (Anas clypeata); ray; skate	"ray, skate meaning questioned"	пыкӯтаҳрāк
pekuutaq	pos	IPA	shovel; halibut; turbot	No information given.	пыкӯтақ
pelaataq	pos	IPA	blotting paper	Chukotkan (R)	пылāтақ
"pelaaya-, pelaaye-"	pos	IPA	to play cards	also used in Chukotka	"пыля̄я-, пыля̄ӥы-"
pelaayae	pos	IPA	playing card	"pelaayet ‘cards, a deck of cards’"	пыля̄яы
pelataqute-	pos	IPA	to scatter	taghnughhaat aghnam ughnegi pelataqusimiit ‘the children scattered the woman’s sewing all around’; naghaaghutet qaga pelataqumaat entaqun ‘the toys are probably scattered all around outside’	пылятақуты-
peleghqe-	pos	IPA	to get seriously injured; to die due to accident	"peleghqumaaq ifkaghluni ukigaaghluni pennani ‘he got seriously injured when he fell while climbing the cliff’; qimugsiqaq yuuk aviisan ivaghilghiit naalkesaqmegteggu taawa peleghqumalghii kanaghluni kagimleghmi sikumi ‘when the man who had gone hunting by dog team did not return, the others went out to look for him and found him dead, apparently because he had been unable to get back on solid ice when he fell into the slush ice area’"	пылыҳқы-
peleghqii-	pos	IPA	to have a death in the family	No information given.	пылыҳқӣ-
peleqeyengiigh-	pos	IPA	to improperly finish a task; to do a careless job	"peleqeyengiighmeng ulimaaghet piyukniilnguut ‘the carvings don’t look as good, because they were improperly finished’; qamislikagni peleqeyengiighlaataghaak ‘he did a careless job on the sled he made’"	пылықыӥыңӣӷ
pelghute-	pos	IPA	to agree on; to be favorable for; to be suitable	angyaghhaat nutaanllu pelghutii ‘finally it (the weather) is suitable for the boats (to go out)’	пылӷуты-
pelime-	pos	IPA	to shatter; to crumble; to fall apart; to break into many pieces	pelimuq ‘it shattered’ / qergesek kavleguuteghllagyan pelimuk ‘when there was a loud boom the window shattered’; qikut sangllaqat gaapagumangilnguut pelimyugumaaqut ‘things made of clay fall apart easily if they are not properly fired’	пылимы-
pelimte-	pos	IPA	to break into pieces	pelimtaa ‘he broke it into pieces’ / sugenreghem siku pelimtekanga esghapagaa ‘he watched the ice as the swells broke it up’	пылимты-
pelkwaagh-	pos	IPA	to become unaware of one’s surrounding; to be distracted from one’s surroundings; to not pay attention; to wander around	"unugmi igleghtaq alingyugem pelkwaaghnanightuq ‘because of being scared the one traveling at night ceased being unaware of his surroundings (that is, began to pay close attention to them)’; igleghaneghpesini aatak pelkwaaghpenasi ‘while youpl are traveling, don’t let yourself become distracted from your surroundings’"	пыльқӱāӷ-
pellagh-	pos	IPA	lonely; bored	emotional root; pellaghyugtuq ‘he is lonely or bored’; pellaghnaghtuq ‘it makes one lonely or bored’; pellaqetaq ‘one who gets lonely or bored easily’; esla seghleq taakluni navek piniinneq pellaghnaghtuq ‘it gets boring when bad weather lasts for a long time’; pellaqetaatmineng ighnemta tagiyaghaghtestiinkut wiin tagannaqeghngaamta ‘because he gets lonely so easily our son made us come back though we had intended to stay away longer’	пыльяӷ-
pellaghiitaq	pos	IPA	amusement; entertainment; 	atuq pellaghiitaaguq ‘Eskimo singing is good entertainment’; pellaghiitaqaqa eltughaqa ‘I have my grandchild for company’ 	пыльяӷӣтақ
pellallaagh-	pos	IPA	to blow out air with the lips closed together making a noise (as babies and small children do)	"ayumiq taghnughhaat pellallaanghata esla naafnaqniiqegkangat ‘long ago, when children make their blowing noise, they say the weather was going to go bad’; enkaam pellallaaghtesnaanighaqegkangit ‘so they don’t let them make that blowing noise noise’"	пыльалхāӷ-
pellangghite-	pos	IPA	to disperse	Chukotkan (R)	пыльаңӷиты-
pellegh-	pos	IPA	to come apart (especially along a line of some sort through the middle); to fall apart; to separate; to divide; to go in separate ways	pelleghtuq ‘it came  apart’ / pelleghtaa ‘he divided it’; plate-a pelleghtuq qusighqelleghmikun ‘the plate came apart along its crack’; mani pelleghtaak qukaakun ‘they2 divided the money’; cf. pilleghqute-	пыльыӷ-
pelleghmun	pos	IPA	in different directions	particle; pelleghmun qimaguutut ‘they fled in different directions’	пыльыӷмун
pellghute-	pos	IPA	to part from each other; to divorce; to put aside for	pellghutut ‘they parted from each other’; pellghutaa ‘he put some aside for her’ / ima pellghututuk nek taakuk ‘too bad that that couple got a divorce’; pellghutaanga suqameng ‘he put aside some baleen for me’	пыльҳуты-
pelliilgutaq	pos	IPA	pastime	cf. pelliili-	пыльӣлгутақ
pelliili-	pos	IPA	to entertain; to give moral support; to keep (one) from being lonely	pelliilii elngaatall taam yugem nenglaghnalghiim tukuni ‘that amusing man is entertaining his hosts’	пыльӣли-
pelliite-	pos	IPA	to be good company; to be interesting; to cause one to be cheerful	upenghami pelliitaquq payangisaghtunghani qavngarugllak salin payangitkayuguluku ‘many years ago just anticipating and awaiting the arrival of people from the other side (Chukotka) kept one from getting lonely’; pelliilnguq ‘entertaining person or place’	пыльӣты-
pellug-	pos	IPA	to scrape dried fat off a skin of a small animal after the skin has been dried and in so doing to stretch and soften the skin; to process frozen greens by a scraping action	No information given.	пыльюг-
pellugusiq	pos	IPA	board or other hard surface used under a skin being scraped with a skin scraper	No information given.	пыльюгусиқ
pelluk1	pos	IPA	skin-scraping tool worked with both hands and resembling a spokeshave	"used in the dual, pellugek, for one such tool"	пыльюк1
pelluk2	pos	IPA	summer tent with flat sloped roof	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	пыльюк2
pellumeghtaq	pos	IPA	"dish of frozen greens shredded finely by a scraping process, mixed with reindeer fat and chilled"	No information given.	пыльюмыҳтақ
"pellumeq, pellughrak"	pos	IPA	soft surface of dirt snow or sand	No information given.	"пыльюмық, пыльюӷрак"
pellumghute-	pos	IPA	to fall into soft surface as of snow	No information given.	пыльюмӷуты-
pelu-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > pelungi, pelungigh-, pelungite-"	пылю-
pelungi	pos	IPA	cleanliness	No information given.	пылюңи
pelungigh-	pos	IPA	to clean up	pelungighaa ‘he cleaned it up’	пылюңиӷ-
pelungite-	pos	IPA	to be clean; to be tidy	pelunginneq ‘very tidy neat thing or person’	пылюңиты-
peluusae	pos	IPA	saucer	No information given.	пылю̄сяы
pelwetemnakun	pos	IPA	file (hand tool); rasp	Chukotkan (R)	пылӱытымнакун
peng'gu-	pos	IPA	to worry about; to be concerned about	peng'waa ‘he is worried about him’ / peng'waa elngaatall taawa yugem panini ima tanqimi sivulighmi agani Sivungaghtekaq ‘he is very worried about his daughter who went to Savoonga last month’	пыңгу-
pengeg-	pos	IPA	to worry about someone who hasn't returned as expected or who is far away	pengegtuq ‘he is worried’ / pengegtuq panigmineng kaasigalngughmeng inghuyaneng ‘he is worried about his daughter who hasn't come back from picking berries’	пыңыг-
pengekragti-	pos	IPA	to watch out for (because of worry)	angyaneng aviilngughneng yuget esnami pengekragtitaqut ‘the men are keeping an eye out for the boats that are gone because they are worried about them’	пыңыкшахти-
Pengetaaghhaq	pos	IPA	small hill just north of Myghapowit Mt. with VABM “Black”	see Map 6 in Appendices	Пыңытāҳақ
pengetaagte-	pos	IPA	for surface or ice or ground to be bumpy	"Sigugneghem qaaynga taklaghruketun kumlalluni qagingughlluni sikumeng qaakfikughyaqminigu pengetaagteghllagaa. ‘The ice above the beach line froze evenly flat, it became wavy and ice was brought on top of it making it bumpy.’ (SULUWET 109)"	пыңытāхты-
pengiq	pos	IPA	wood (not hardwood but strong); pine wood; larch tree; fir wood	"Taakepigtaqut pengiiwaqutlu entaqun quukaqaput… ‘The long ones were fir, and we had them for firewood…’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)"	пыңиқ
pengke-	pos	IPA	to worry about	pengkaa ‘he is worried about him’ / pengkaa ighneni maligutesnegha taakutgun angyatgun ‘he is worried about his son who has gone with them in that boat’	пыңкы-
pengugaghte-	pos	IPA	for a bump to form from an injury; for a small hill to form	No information given.	пыңугаҳты-
pengugh-	pos	IPA	"to swell or rise in a lump, bumpor hump"	No information given.	пыңуӷ-
Pengughqaq	pos	IPA	a site with a sizable mound about a mile back from Camp Collier (Kangii) on St. Lawrence Is.	See Map 4 in Appendices	пыңуҳқақ
pengughqaq	pos	IPA	rising lump; hillock	No information given.	пыңуҳқақ
pengugneq	pos	IPA	protrusion caused by something pushing from behind	No information given.	пыңугнық
pengugpagngalghii	pos	IPA	a wavy surface	No information given.	пыңухпагңалӷӣ
pengukrak	pos	IPA	mound; small hill	Chukotkan (R)	пыңукшак
penguq	pos	IPA	rounded hill	No information given.	пыңуқ
Pengutekuk	pos	IPA	Pingootikook Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	No information given.	Пыңутыкук
pengwaaq	pos	IPA	mound; small hill	"there are two mounds, one at Taphok (Tapghuq) and the other at Camp Collier (Kangii) that are called specifically Pengwaaq"	пыңӱāқ
Peniilek	pos	IPA	Punelok Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Пыиӣлык
penitet	pos	IPA	leaf tobacco bunch	Chukotkan (R); this is a plural	пынитыт
pennaghniigh-	pos	IPA	to gather eggs from a cliff or engage in other cliffside activities	pennaghniightuq ‘he is gathering eggs (or doing another cliffside activity)’ /	пыньаӷнӣӷ-
pennaghqute-	pos	IPA	to fall down from a cliff	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	пыньаҳқуты-
pennaq	pos	IPA	cliff	No information given.	пыньақ
Penniighem Qalghighviga	pos	IPA	September; December	"Chukotkan; literally, ‘time when the mountain sheep issues its cry’;  listed in two sources giving these two quite separate months"	Пыньӣӷым Қалӷиӷвига
penniighniighta	pos	IPA	shepherd	used in Bible translation	пыньӣнӣҳта
penniiq	pos	IPA	Dall sheep (Ovis dalli); domestic sheep; sheepskin	"the wild sheep is found in Chukotka, but not on St. Lawrence Is.; domestic sheep are known through the Bible and other outside contacts; … kayutngunateng; penniighestun penniighnightengilngughestun. ‘… they were helpless; like sheep without a shepherd.’ (Matthew 10.36)"	пыньӣқ
peqaq	pos	IPA	fine tundra moss used for wick in seal-oil lamp; lamp wick moss	No information given.	пықақ
peqigte-	pos	IPA	to figure out	agghilghiit upenghaqun mangteghat nekefsaghqaaluku peqigtaat ‘they figured out how to place the house they will build the next spring’; llivelghangllaqagni pegnem peqighquumakek ‘he finally figured out how he is going to make his shelf’	пықихты-
peqligh-1	pos	IPA	to harden with age (especially of skins)	= peqlighte-	пықльиӷ-1
peqligh-2	pos	IPA	to deny having something (which one may or may not have)	peqlightuq ‘he denied having something’ / peqliitaa  ‘he denied to her that he has something’; peqliitkaa ‘he denied that he has it’; = peliqe-	пықльиӷ-2
peqlighte-	pos	IPA	to harden with age (especially of skins)	#NAME?	пықльиҳты-
peqliqe-	pos	IPA	to deny having something (which one may or may not have)	peqliquq ‘he denied having something’ / peqliqutaa ‘he denied to her that he has something’; peqliqutkaa ‘he denied that he has it’; = peqligh-2	пықльиқы-
pequ	pos	IPA	unstable area in ice field where current causes ice to heave or break up leaving dangerous open water covered by thin ice or snow	see item 45 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	пықу
peraagha-	pos	IPA	for weather to be suitable for hunting	pakfallameng anuqa ayuqenghani peraaghaneng lliighniiqaat uughqanun tevraq ‘they say that west wind makes it most suitable for hunting seals on the west coast’	пырāӷа-
perara	pos	IPA	dish of finely minced meat cooked in meat broth and then jelled before eating	No information given.	пырара
periiwell	pos	IPA	let	"particle; periiwell whangkunnun malighulli ellngan qinuyuggnanghitiinkut ‘let him follow to our place, he won’t bother us’"	прӣӱыль
perqi-1	pos	IPA	to not want to do anything because of the cold	"aatkapagilnguut maqalghiimeng uksumi perqiniiqiit ‘they say that people who don’t dress as warm as they should in winter do not want to do anything (outdoors)’; iqaniighyaq perqiyami tagimalghii ‘when the crabber got cold, and didn’t want to do anything, he went home’"	пышқи-1
perqi-2	pos	IPA	to become twisted or bent probably from arthritis (of dog’s leg(s)); to be rheumatic or arthritic (of dogs)	qikmighpt perqingaaq ‘our dog has rheumatism’	пышқи-2
perutku	pos	IPA	snuff box or other tobacco container	"used in the dual, perutkuk, for one tobacco container"	пырутку
pesaaghnaq	pos	IPA	calm; quietness	pesaaghnaaguq qaga ‘it is too calm and quiet out there’	пыся̄ӷнақ
pesaaq	pos	IPA	quiet whispering sound	No information given.	пыся̄қ
pesall	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > pesalli-, pesallngugh-"	пысяль
pesalli-	pos	IPA	to have difficulty finding something	manini ifkaghluku pesallitkaqeftaa ‘he dropped his money and he was having a hard time finding it’	пысальи-
pesallngugha-	pos	IPA	to have difficulty breathing (in water as when overboard)	"kiiwegni iquluni pesallngughamaluku maketqaghsimakanga ‘while he was having a hard time breathing when he fell in the river, she quickly let him stand up’; meq pesallngughanaghtuq pugimiigalngughni ‘the water  is the place where one has a hard time breathing for anyone who don’t know how to swim’"	пысальңьуӷа-
pesiqagh-	pos	IPA	to eat walrus in frozen bite-size pieces	= pisiqagh-	пысиқаӷ-
pesiqaq	pos	IPA	frozen raw walrus meat eaten in bite-size pieces	#NAME?	пысиқақ
peskug-	pos	IPA	"to slip off (as a rope off something to which it is fastened); to come to an end (anger, sadness, etc.)"	"peskugtuq ‘it slipped off, it came to an end’ / peskugtaa ‘he slipped it off’; peskugtigu taana tapghaq agaqrameng taagken wall-melngughmeng ‘slip that rope off the hook on the wall’; sakraa pegnem taaga peskugtestaqa ugumiyugtenga atamta esghaghluku tawavestaghhaq ‘I had a hard time getting over my anger when I ran into the person who gave our father so much trouble’"	пыскуг-
peskuq	pos	IPA	width	questioned	пыскуқ
pesugh-	pos	IPA	stuffy; suffocating	"emotional root; pesughnaghtuq ‘it is stuffy, suffocating’; pesughyugtuq ‘he is having difficulty breathing due to the stuffiness, he is suffocating’; pesughyugemnguq yuuk itagniilliqestaqeftaa ‘as we've seen, breathing problems are making him miserable’"	пысюӷ-
"petangu, petanguq1"	pos	IPA	wooden bowl	No information given.	"пытаңу-, пытаңуқ1"
petanguq2	pos	IPA	flipper bone	Chukotkan (R)	пытаңқуқ2
petangwaaq	pos	IPA	smaller bowl or bowl-like thing	No information given.	пытаңӱāқ
petaq	pos	IPA	"measles, chicken pox or similar disease"	No information given.	пытақ
petekesengiigh-	pos	IPA	to tiptoe	petekesengiightuq ‘he is tiptoeing’ /	пытыкысыңӣӷ-
petg-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > petga-, petgegh-"	пытх-
"petga-, petgagh-"	pos	IPA	to bounce	petgaaq ‘it bounced’ / < petg-?-	"пытха-, пытхаӷ-"
petgagha-	pos	IPA	to bounce repeatedly	No information given.	пытхаӷа-
petgayu-	pos	IPA	to be bouncy	No information given.	пытхаю-
petgegh-	pos	IPA	to bounce off something	iiyngakun naangquvleghameng petgeghvikluku aqnighqwaagaa ‘it hurt him when the little scrap of ivory bounced off his eye’	пытхыӷ-
petgeghinagh-	pos	IPA	to have difficulty getting something	"qamiskani nuughyan aaptaghtaquyaghluni petgeghinaghtuq ‘when he ran out of supplies for the sled he was making, he went out to ask for some, but he had a hard time finding any’"	пытхыӷинаӷ-
Petngeghyak	pos	IPA	site near mouth of Maknek River	see Map 6 in Appendices	Пытңьыӷьяк
petqa	pos	IPA	quite another one; different	No information given.	пытқа
petug-	pos	IPA	to tie so as to keep in place; to tether; to fasten	petugaa ‘he tied it to something’ / petuggu qikmiq taaggun napaqakun ‘tie that dog to that stake’	пытуг-
petugaq	pos	IPA	a tethered animal; a restricted person	No information given.	пытугақ
petugutaq	pos	IPA	tether; tie rope or chain	No information given.	пытугутақ
pezighmete-1	pos	IPA	to be totally thawed	Chukotkan	пызиӷмыты-1
pezighmete-2	pos	IPA	to be red; to be light-brown (of hair)	Chukotkan (R); pezighmelnguut nuyat ‘light brown hairs’	пызиӷмыты-1
pezighte-	pos	IPA	to heat kelp for eating	pezighsaghqameng elqwaaghemng saghnaanga ‘I picked some kelp to be heated up for eating’; pezightekameng ugkekun neqnighqusimaat ‘they enjoyed cooked kelp with meat’	пызиҳты-
pi	pos	IPA	thing	meaning heavily dependent on context; kellaagem pinga naagu ‘where is that part of the clock?’; pin naagu? ‘where is your thing?’; pit esghaamakesqaqiit ‘they say to look after (one's own) people’	пи
pi-	pos	IPA	to do; to act; to say; to go	piiq ‘he did or said something’; pii ‘he acted on it or said something to him’ / meaning heavily dependent on context; pimakanga ‘he said to her’; pigu taana ‘do it to that’; piiq tawaten ‘he said thus’; pi! ‘go!’; pii-i! ‘go!’ (emphatic); pikaaguq or piskaaguq ‘he has gone’; piyalghiimi ‘as he went on (with his activity)’	пи-
pightughpak	pos	IPA	heavy drifting snow	No information given.	пиҳтуҳпак
pightughruk	pos	IPA	light drifting snow	No information given.	пиҳтуӷрук
pightughseghaq	pos	IPA	land or river otter (Lutra canadensis); fur seal (Callorhinus urinus)	"questioned whether this is actually the otter, the fur seal, or both; neither are found on St. Lawrence Is.; Uyughaghma pightughseghaq guusaghaa anagtaa. ‘My younger bother shot at a fur seal and missed it.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 130)"	пиҳтуҳсыӷақ
pightuq	pos	IPA	drifting blowing snow	pightughllugmi qimugsineq aqlagha seghleghllaguuq ‘traveling by dog team in drifting snow is very cold’	пиҳтуқ
pigineq	pos	IPA	insole traditionally made of dried grass	kaamgegni piginighak ‘he put insoles in his boots’	пигинық
pigraghaasi-	pos	IPA	to act to benefit someone’s belongings	Chukotkan (V&E)	пиграӷāси-
piifqe-	pos	IPA	to get things ready as for a ceremony	No information given.	пӣфқы-
piifte-	pos	IPA	to set out for use	piiftaa ‘he set it out’ / piiftiiq ‘he set out something’; piivikaa or piiftefikaa ‘he set something out for him’; piiftekaaguq ‘it has been set out’	пӣфты-
piig-	pos	IPA	to tear	piigtuq ‘it tore’; piigaa ‘he tore it’ / piilleq amsighqaa ‘she mended the tear’	пӣг-
piighaghte-	pos	IPA	"to go, say, or act quickly"	No information given.	пӣӷаҳты-
piighataaghagh-	pos	IPA	to get better; to improve	piighataaghaghtuq qinuyuk yuuk ‘the sick man is getting better’; meq unegna seghleghllaguyalghii piighataaghaqeghtuq ‘the ocean that has been so rough is finally showing some improvement’	пӣӷатāӷаӷ-
piighhaq	pos	IPA	braided thing; whale sinew braided into heavy cord for sewing skin boat covers	No information given.	пӣҳақ
piighhe-	pos	IPA	to braid	piighhuq (or piighhiiq) ‘he  braided something’; piighhaa ‘he is braided it’ /	пӣҳы-
piighqutagh-	pos	IPA	to slap the water with a piece of baleen to get walrus excited and come to the surface	piighqutaghluki suumenghat kaalluki naghulkiinaghaqluki ‘they would slap the water and they would come to the angry walrus and harpoon it’	пӣҳқутаӷ-
piighqutaq	pos	IPA	striker of baleen used to strike water to attract sea mammals	No information given.	пӣҳқутақ
piighqwaghate-	pos	IPA	to go to help a boat that has caught a whale	angyaq taan’ga piighqwaghatuq ‘the boats out there are all going to the one that caught a whale’	пиҳқӱаӷаты-
piighru	pos	IPA	sty in eye	No information given.	пӣӷру
piighwagh-	pos	IPA	to chase game by boat; to approach game on ice by boat	angyat malagmeng piighwaamaluki naghughsimakangit ‘it turned out that they passed by a boat which was chasing aa bearded seal’; yakuqeqaghlluta piighwaghtukut ayveghnun ‘we cautiously approached the walruses’	пӣӷӱаӷ-
piighwneq	pos	IPA	draft coming into warm house as a vapor from the outside cold when the door is opened in winter	"uumgaqluku esgha piighwneq iitghaatalghii ‘keep that door close, the draft is getting in’"	пӣӷӱнық
piigna	pos	IPA	that one not far behind	Chukotkan; base ping-; restricted demonstrative pronoun; absolutive/relative plural piingkut ‘those not far behind’; localis adverb pigani ‘not far behind’	пӣгна
piignga-	pos	IPA	to protrude; to stick out	Chukotkan (R); savik minglemeng piigngaaquq ‘the knike is sticking out of the wall’	пӣгңа-
piigugh-	pos	IPA	to tear up	No information given.	пӣгуӷ-
piikna	pos	IPA	that one up there above; that one up from the water; that one to the north (additional meaning in Chukotka)	"base: pik-; restricted demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: pikum ‘(of) the one up there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: pikegkut ‘those up there’; vocative: piiksuq ‘you, up there’, pikegkughsi ‘youpl up there’; anaphoric absolutive pronoun: tespikna or espikna ‘that one up there’; localis adverb: pikani ‘up there’; terminalis adverb: pikavek to up there; vialis adverb: pikagun ‘through up there’; ablative adverb: pikegken ‘from up there’; interjectional: pika ‘there (up there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tespikani or espikani ‘there, up there’"	пӣкньа
piimsug-	pos	IPA	to pick all the meat from a bone and eat it; to completely eat the last meat that is clinging to a bone; to pick clean	qawaagem yaqghwi piimsugii ‘he picked the bird wing clean’	пӣмсюг-
piina	pos	IPA	paint	= piineq; also used in Chukotka	пӣна
piineq	pos	IPA	paint	Angyamta piingha keligluku piineqaghput. ‘After we scraped off our boat’s paint we painted it.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 76); = piina; also in Chukotka	пӣнық
piineqe-	pos	IPA	to paint	"piineqaa ‘he painted it’ / piineqiiq ‘he painted something’; piineqista ‘house-painter’; Apeghiighyamigu piineqneghmeng, meteghllugem pii teghla: “Esgha, enngaatall pinightuten, kinquvek anuqataghaghmi whanga piineqnakevnga.” ‘When he finished his painting the raven said to the owl: “See, you look very fine; when you dry off in the breeze, you can paint me.”’ (AANGHHAQ 27)"	пӣнықы-
piineqisiq	pos	IPA	paintbrush	"plural, piineqisit, used for one brush; = piinequsiq"	пӣнықисиқ
piinequsiq	pos	IPA	paintbrush	"plural, piinequsit, used for one brush; = piineqisiq"	пӣнықусиқ
piinghaq	pos	IPA	newly grown plant life; the beggining of full moon; month; year	kiyang piinghaaluku ququngaq saghnakayugaat ‘willow leaves are picked mostly when they are newly grown’	пӣнӷақ
piinleq	pos	IPA	beginning; start; precedent; forerunner	ilagaatem piinlegha atughhu ‘sing the beginning of the song’	пӣнлық
piinligh-	pos	IPA	to begin; to start	piinlighaa ullghitakun igleghtelleq ‘he started the use of snow machines’	пӣнлиӷ-
piinliin	pos	IPA	onset; first thing; beginning; introduction (as to a book)	piinliitanga wetku movie-m atuumaan liigikaqa esghaqaqeftaqa ‘not until the first part of the movie had been shown did I realize that I'd already seen it’; aghvengyuggaaq piinliitkaa kalleghsaaghtem ‘catching the first whale of the season signals the start of ball-playing at the beach’	пӣнлӣн
piinlilleq	pos	IPA	introduction (as to a book)	No information given.	пӣнлильық
piinneghsiighaghvik	pos	IPA	garden; flower pot or vase	No information given.	пӣньыҳсӣӷаӷвик
piinpaghqe-	pos	IPA	to get a large wound or serious injury	ayviiluni sagmikun piinpaghqumalghii ‘he got a big cut from his knife when he was butchering a walrus’; sangwaa alngunak singikestaq piinpaghqusiqaqegkangat naten pillgilliqneghmeggni ‘anything sharp can cause large wounds when used carelessly’	пӣнпаҳқы-
piinsuuka	pos	IPA	beans; peas	also used in Chukotka	пӣнсю̄ка
piiq	pos	IPA	bail; bail-type handle	No information given.	пӣқ
piislayae	pos	IPA	thin rope; string	Chukotkan (R); ellngan tuyusaghqani qepaqii piislayemeng ‘she ties her packages with string’	писльяы
piisqaghte-	pos	IPA	to jump out of the water	No information given.	пӣсқаҳты-
piiste-	pos	IPA	to project; to stick out	piistuq ‘it stuck out’ /	пӣсты-
piitaq	pos	IPA	bone with meat to be picked off and eaten	piitameng ugkekunga ‘I have bones with meat on them to pick off and eat as my meal’	пӣтақ
piite-1	pos	IPA	to pick the meat meat from a bone and eat it; to eat the last meat that is clinging to a bone	No information given.	пӣты-1
piite-2	pos	IPA	to come into view or into existence; to sprout; to rise (of the sun); for there to be a noon moon or for the month to start	"kaamwaaq piituq ‘the crowsfoot (plant) is sprouting’; siqineq piituq ‘the sun is rising’; Kaneghyengesiq piitaa? ‘did December begin yet?’; Siqineq piinneghani nanevgaat aanleghaataqut aghnalqwaaghet unegtaqut. ‘When the sun rises, the old men go out and the old women stay behind.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 48)"	пӣты-2
piitesighagh-	pos	IPA	to plant; to sow	"Piitesighaghta piitesighaghvigminun aglaghluni, ifkaghquqaq piitutneng. ‘A sower went out to his garden to sow seeds.’ (Matthew 13.3) "	пӣтысиӷаӷ-
piitesighaghvik	pos	IPA	garden; flower pot or vase	No information given.	пӣтысиӷаӷвик
piitesighaq	pos	IPA	plant that someone is growing; flower	Aghknaghaghhaak piitesighaghmeng saghnatuk naayvam esnenganeng. ‘Two little girls picked flowers together by the lake’s shore.’ (SLI JR. DICT.)	пӣтысиӷақ
piitkayuk	pos	IPA	vegetation	No information given.	пӣткаюк
piitkegsi--	pos	IPA	to be sucessful or fortunate in hunting and trapping	"uksumi whani piitkegsiiq kaviighniilghii, sighlatkumakanga ‘this winter he suceeded in getting a lot of foxes’; piitkegsikuyeng upenghaqun aghvenglaataghllequt ‘if they are fortune next spring, they will get a whale once again’"	пӣткыхси-
piitqughvike-	pos	IPA	for plants to grow on road or trail	Chukotkan (R)	пӣтқуӷвивы-
piitun	pos	IPA	seed; root of plant; plant	Alungutellghem asingani siklaamalghii. Siklaghluni piitutmeng akuquusimalghii. ‘She dug with a pick underneath the snowdrift. When she’d dug with a pick she gathered plants.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20);	пӣтун
piitutraq	pos	IPA	flower	Chukotkan (R)	пӣтутшақ
piiv-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > piivnga-, piifte-"	пӣв-
piivnga-	pos	IPA	to have been set out for use; to be all set to come forth	piivngaaq ‘it has been set out’; naangiitutmineng quningi piivngaaqut ‘ever since she lost her mother her tears have been ready to burst forth’	пӣвңа-
piiwagh-	pos	IPA	to go west; to go home	piiwaghtuutut Sivunghaghtat ‘the visitors to Savoonga are heading back west (to Gambell)’	пӣӱаӷ-
piiz-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > piiste-, piisqaghte-, piiznga-"	пӣз-
piizneq	pos	IPA	projection; something sticking out	piiznegha napaghyam yeghrat awavantepigtuq ‘the part of the mast that sticks out sticks out too far’	пӣзнық
piiznga-	pos	IPA	to be sticking out	piizngaaq ‘it is sticking out’ /	пӣзңа-
pikayuk	pos	IPA	powerful shaman	Chukotkan (R)	пикаюк
pike-	pos	IPA	to own; to be related to	"pikaa ‘he owns it, has her as his relative’ / pikaqa ‘it is mine’; pikaghput uyavanteghngaan ‘he is our relative though how distant’"	пикы-
pikemla	pos	IPA	threshold of house	Chukotkan	пикымля
pikraghniite-	pos	IPA	"to be unappealing, undesirable, or appears not to be very good"	"ulimayugaaqiinguq pikraghniilnguut, tagtalmi piniightekat ‘his first carvings didn’t look so good, then as he made more, they improved’; yugmeng pikraghniilngughmeng esghaasimanga ‘I saw a person who doen’t look good’"	пикшаӷнӣты-
pilaanqegsagh-	pos	IPA	to get or be ready	kilgaaqusaghqat pilaanqegsaalluteng ayuqut ‘the runners are all ready’; aangqaghtet aatkateng aatqughluki pilaaqegsaatut ‘the ball players have their uniforms on and are ready to play’	пиля̄нқыхсяӷ-
pilaataqu-	pos	IPA	to achieve success; to do something very well	Nangllegsiisiq uumun upenghaam neqniillgha pilaataqusqelluku. ‘(It was) a supplication concerning the coming time that the spring hunt would be a success.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:206)	пилāтақу-
pilaayaghagh-	pos	IPA	to teasingly say something and be taken literally	"pilaayaghaghpenaan seghlequughyaghluku sugagsimakanga ‘he jokingly said not so nice things about her, and she was offended py it’"	пилāӥаӷаӷ-
pilag-	pos	IPA	to cut; to slash; to butcher whale; to undergo or perform surgery	"pilagtuq ‘he butchered a whale’ or ‘he had surgery’; pilagaa ‘he cut it, butchered it, performed surgery on him or it’ / taaghtam pilagaa qinuyuk ‘the doctor performed surgery on the sick person’; pilagyaghtughtuq he went to have an operation’"	пиляг-
pilagh-	pos	IPA	to do or take many things	taakut aftakat iqalluget pilaghii enkaam whanga ilangi pilaghlleqanka ‘he got the salmon that are cut and I will get the others’; iqallugem naasqwi ellngan pilaghii ‘he took the salmon heads’	пиляӷ-
pilagtugh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly cut; to saw	No information given.	пиляхтуӷ-
pilagtuusiq	pos	IPA	saw (cutting tool)	No information given.	пиляхтӯсиқ
piliigh-	pos	IPA	to eat by cutting off bits of meat eaten one at a time	piliightuq ‘he ate by cutting off bits of meat and eating them as he cut’; piliighaa ‘he cut chunks off of it and ate them’ /	пилӣӷ-
pilleghqute-	pos	IPA	to disperse; to leave in different directions	cf. pellegh-	пильыҳқуты-
pillek	pos	IPA	one who is proficient; one who is adept; skillful person	"from the ""empty base"" pi- which is ""stress-repelling""  (see Jacobson  1984b) so that  i does not lengthen during suffixation: pillguuq (rather than *piillguuq) ‘he is skillful’; pinighsaghimeng pillguuten ‘you are good at fixing things’"	пильык
pillgilliqe-	pos	IPA	to have trouble due to one’s ineptitude	"Nalugusimalghii tipelegneng eflugamun, pillgilliqamikun Paapgallegaghhaq, aqnightelleghqagni suumqeghpenakek. ‘Poor little Paapgaq jumped from the table to the floor disregarding any trouble he might have due to his ineptitude and not considering that he might get hurt.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 7)"	пильхильиқы-
pillgite-	pos	IPA	to be inept; to not be good in something	pillgituq ‘he is inept’ / pillgituq igaghyami ‘he is not good in school’; naangqumeng ulimameng pillgituq ‘he doesn't know how to carve ivory’; laluramketimeng pillgitunga ‘I'm not good at speaking English’	пильхиты-
pillguyugte-	pos	IPA	to put on airs; to pretend to have abilities one does not have	"pillguyugtuq ‘he acts as if he can do things which he cannot’ / qinuyagulluku pillguyugsan yeghrat unitaat ‘when he became insufferable to them by putting on airs, they left him’"	пильхуюхты-
pillugaasiq	pos	IPA	weapon for war	No information given.	пильюгāсиқ
pillugagh-	pos	IPA	to fight physically; to fight in war	No information given.	пильюгаӷ-
pillugaghta	pos	IPA	warrior; raider	Pillugaghtet wayaqegkiitneng Umiilgu qerngughtimalghii. ‘Umiilgu gathered up the raiders’ booty.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 46)	пильюгаӷта
pillugaghyaghtuq	pos	IPA	warrior; raider	Panameng tugulluni Umiilgum pillugaghyaghtuq tuququumanga. Panaluku ama ughluveghmeng guulluku pillugaghyaghtuq qamagsimakanga. ‘Taking a spear in hand Umiilgu killed every last raider. Spearing them and shooting them with a bow he finished off the raiders.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 46)	пильюгаӷьяҳтуқ
pillugute-	pos	IPA	to fight physically; to fight in war	No information given.	пильюгуты-
pilugug-	pos	IPA	to put on one’s clothes	pilugugtuq ‘he put on his clothes’	пилюгуг-
piluguk	pos	IPA	clothing	pilugugi qateperewaaghuut ‘his clothing is all white’	пилюгук
pinaaqa	pos	IPA	protective mark on clothes or protectively marked clothes; amulet; tassel	No information given.	пинāқа
pinagh-	pos	IPA	to begin to melt; to start to break up (of frozen lakes and rivers in spring)	"said of lakes and rivers when the ice on them becomes unsafe for travel in the spring; naayvaq pinaqan tagifqaavek wiin qimugsimeng ‘do not come, not even by dogteam when the lake starts to melt’"	пинаӷ-
Pinaghvik	pos	IPA	June	"literally, ‘time when melting of lakes begins’; also given in various sources as April-May, May, and June-July (and even as August!)"	Пинаӷвик
pinasaaq	pos	IPA	paper bag	Chukotkan (R); cf. pipasaak	пинасяқ
pineghlliqe-	pos	IPA	"to be obstinate, stubborn or heedless"	No information given.	пиныӷльиқы-
pineghllug-	pos	IPA	"to be obstinate, stubborn or heedless"	pineghllugutmineng aqnighllaataghtuq as a result of his stubbornness he got badly hurt’	пиныӷльюг-
pineq	pos	IPA	case; opportunity; chance; incident	No information given.	пинық
Pingayaa aghneq	pos	IPA	Tuesday	so called because Tuesday is the third day of the week	Пиңая̄ аӷнық
pingayuggaaghte-	pos	IPA	to be only three left	pingayuggaaghtut ‘there are only three of them left’	пиңаюхāҳты-
pingayugneq	pos	IPA	three things; three groups	"used with a plural ending and therefore realized as pingayugneghet, pingayugneghneng, etc.; used to indicate three things, when the noun for that thing is used in  the plural or dual even for a single entitity,  or to indicate three groups (such as families), thus: Pingayugneghet angyat. ‘[There were] three boats with crew.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:122; note that plural, angyat, is used for one ‘boat with crew’); Naaka pingayugneghneng qiipaghalek. ‘My mother had three cloth cover parkas.’ (SULUWET 13; note that dual, qiipaghaak, is used for one ‘cloth cover parka’); Taakut pughileghmelnguut Agaankutlu, Anagutaankutlu malghugneghet. ‘Only two families were staying permanently at Southwest Cape, Agaq and family, and  Anagutaq and family.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:162)"	пиңаюгнық
pingayuneng inglulek	pos	IPA	eight	Pingayuneng inglulguyalghiit quyngighqwaaghet. Avegluteng pikaaftut. ‘There had been eight reindeer herds. They split into two groups.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:58)	пиңаюның иңлюлык
pingayut	pos	IPA	three	"Aasimakanga inglupigaq temkam ighunga inglunganun aasimakanga ilepghaaghem ighunga. Repall atanga aaghhweregaghmeng aanumalghii, llangaqa pingayuneng ighukelghii. ‘However, he put on only one leg of the pants; on the other side he put on a long boot. The father went out crawling, looking like he had three legs.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 72); the word pingayut is plural, but the singular  pingayu can occur as in: Kiyang pingayu whanga qavaghlluki peghqightaataqaqanka, pingayu qavaq. ‘It usually took me three days to break them in, three days.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:90)"	пиңают
pingigigun	pos	IPA	second spouse	No information given.	пиңигигун
pingughte-	pos	IPA	to become old enough to be a source of help to parents or to take on a more adult role; to begin to grow up	"pingughquutuq taghnughhaayalghii qavngaq ‘they all became helpers to their parents, at one time they were children’; pingughtaghaquvek sufluwangulleqamken ‘when you become more of a help to your parents, I will get you a gun’; taakut ighnelghutangit pingughquulluteng angyaaghtut ‘their many sons are all grown and are on the crew of the boat’"	пиңуҳты-
pingwaaq	pos	IPA	important person	entaqun taana yuuk pingwaaghuuq esghaqun awen aaptaqaat wiin ‘I think that person is important because they usually ask him before doing anything’	пиңӱāқ
pingwallaak	pos	IPA	oustanding one; distinguished one	No information given.	пиңӱалья̄к
pinigh-	pos	IPA	to be good; to be satisfying; to be fine	pinightuq ‘it is good’ / pinightunga ‘I’m fine’	пиниӷ-
pinighhalek	pos	IPA	how good!	"exclamatory particle: pinighhalek kiigmi uqfigmi ‘oh, how good (it is) in the summer in the trees’"	пиниҳалык
pinighi-	pos	IPA	to get better; to improve	"pinighiiq 'it improved, got better'"	пиниӷи-
pinighnagh-	pos	IPA	to be made pleasing	mangteghaq piineqsalghiimi pinighaghtaa ‘now that the house has been painted it looks nice’	пиниӷнаӷ-
pinighnaq	pos	IPA	something made nice; nice thing or person; beautiful thing or person	No information given.	пиниӷнақ
pinighqaq	pos	IPA	one who is physically very active; a very healthy person who takes care of himself by exercising	"pinighqaatmineng yuuk sigugneghem qaaynganun qetgeghtuq ‘since he is a fit man, he jumped on to the snow bank’"	пиниҳқақ
pinighqe-	pos	IPA	to enjoy life; to live well or contentedly	pinighquq ‘he enjoyed life’	пиниҳқы-
pinighqun	pos	IPA	decoration; benefit	"Chukotkan (R, V&E); qikmit aywan yugitnun tagitiiqut aangelghimeng pinighqutmeng ‘the dogs give a great benefit to the northern peoples’"	пиниҳқун
pinighsagh-	pos	IPA	to fix; decorate	No information given.	пиниҳсаӷ-
pinightutala-	pos	IPA	beauty; quality	No information given.	пиниҳтуталя-
pinighyug-	pos	IPA	to be cheerful	No information given.	пиниӷьюг-
piniighte-	pos	IPA	to improve; to get better; to become good; to become acceptable	tuquyuk piniighteghraagaa legan ‘the critically ill patient has certainly gotten better’; Esla piniightekan igleghllequnga. ‘When the weather improves I’ll travel.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 131)	пинӣҳты-
piniiyugneq	pos	IPA	hypocrite	"used in Bible translation: Uyuq piniiyugneq! Sivukluku unaghsighllak iyegpeneng nusugluku elngaatall whateghlluwaaq esghaghluku yulguten iisqughutngighnaken. ‘You hypocrite! First take the log out of your own eye, and then you will see clearly to take the speck out of your neighbor’s eye.’ (Matthew 7:5)"	пинӣюгнық
Pinilghii Ungipaq	pos	IPA	Gospel	Pinilghiit Ungipat ‘the Gospels’	Пинилӷӣ Уңипақ
piniqe-	pos	IPA	to like; to love; to approve	piniqaa ‘he likes it’ /	пиниқы-
piniqumtaaq	pos	IPA	boyfriend; girlfriend	No information given.	пиниқумтāқ
piniraaghinaq*	pos	IPA	the best thing	"Nangzeghaat neqesghaaluteng piniraaghinaat. ‘The hard seal blubber is the best thing to use as bait.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 113); Mangteghaqsagutaput. Legan unaghsimeng tawaten ulimaluki, canvas-meng qantaghluki. Llaaghanwha legan azigutat piniraaghinaat. ‘It became our house. Then we improved it with wood, and covered it with canvas. And so it was the best possible shelter.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:70)"	пинирāӷинақ
pinitun	pos	IPA	in a good way; well	"particle; kiyaghtaquq pinitun ‘he lives well’; pinitun ayuquq ‘it is going good’ or ‘it appears to be good’ (literally, ‘it is like, good’)"	пинитун
pinitungwaaq	pos	IPA	carefully; cleverly; beautifully; eloquently; nicely; prudently	particle	пинитуңӱāқ
piniyugte-	pos	IPA	to rejoice; to be in a good state of mind	Chukotkan (R)	пиниюхты-
pinqusiq	pos	IPA	present (good) state or condition (as compared to a previous state)	pinqusimineng esla piniightaa ‘the weather is better than it has ever been’	пинқусиқ
pipasaak	pos	IPA	paper sack; paper bag	cf. pinasaaq	пипася̄к
pipigte-	pos	IPA	to do something more than previously; to be some way more than before	"esla naaftaqelleghmineng taawa pipigtuq ‘the weather is ever worse than before’; atulghiit pipigtut whani pilleghmi, repall iglagiitusimalghiit ‘the drummers are drumming much harder than they usually do, so much that they lost their voices’"	пипихты-
Piqalak	pos	IPA	Southwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Пиқаляк
"piraaghagh-, piraghagh-"	pos	IPA	to benefit; to succeed; to have advantages; to have something new	"legan piraghaghtestak angayughqagni angliyalghiimi piyagusalghiimi allughqagkenka ‘well, they certainly are benefiting from the success of their adopted child now that he has grown up and can do things’"	"пирāӷаӷ-, пираӷаӷ-"
piraamsi-	pos	IPA	to be careful and/or meticulous	"piraamsiiq ‘he is being meticulous’ / piraamsitaa ‘he is being meticulous with it’; uyavaqaantaghngaan piraamsilluku ayveq qiinghulluku guusaqegka elqughaghqwaagaqa’ although it was quite far, I took pains to aim carefully thus hitting the walrus right on the mark’"	пирāмси-
piraghyiilliqe-	pos	IPA	to disturb; to impede; to bother; to prevent	ivaghiniightet piraghyiilliqestaqii tagitugem ‘the fog is preventing the hunters (keeping them from going out hunting)’	пираӷӥӣльиқы-
pirughhniigh-	pos	IPA	to obtain by persistent asking	No information given.	пируҳньӣӷ-
pirughte-	pos	IPA	to acquire gifts (usually of food) either given through freewill or because of societal obligations	"pirughtitigu whangkuta pikaghput ‘give her a gift, she is our kin’; pirughhniighyaa maklaglleghhiinun, luuraq upughaksaaghaaten pinilleghmeng tuunyaaghaaten ‘go get some meat from the people who caught a bearded seal since they might, after all, just give you a prize piece if you ask’"	пируҳты-
pisaghagh-	pos	IPA	to provoke; to dare; to try to persuade one to do something; to challenge	"aleni aanyamek pisaghaghaa ellmi estugaghmun maligtesqelluni pisnaniqaq iimna ‘when they went out he tried to persuade his friend to go with him to the store, knowing full well that his friend had been forbidden to do so’; pisaghaghluku pillugaghtestuq ‘by provoke him he made him get into a fight with him’"	писяӷаӷ-
pisaghtiigh-	pos	IPA	to be so dark that nothing can be seen; be pitch black	pisaghtiighmi yuuk igleghteghngaaghmi naaglluni siklaasimalghii ‘a man was walking in the dark and he tripped and fell’; uksaaghem unuga pisaghtiiq mamlekegtaq ‘the falltime nights are really dark’	писаҳтиӷ-
pisighwaagh-	pos	IPA	to delay; to stall; to pretend; to hesitate due to shyness	"aghnaghaq pisighwaaghneghtuuq neghvigmi wata piyukegkaqengilkemminun ‘the girl pretends to be busy when there are customers she doesn't like at the restaurant’; pisighwaaghnaqegpenang! ‘don't you dare pretend to be busy when you are asked to do things!’; quutkegpenaan, temngi pisighwaaqayuguuq upughalleghmikun ‘don't rely on him since he only pretends to be helpful’"	писиӷӱāӷ-
pisiqagh-	pos	IPA	to eat walrus in frozen bite-size pieces	= pesiqagh-	писиқаӷ-
pisiqaq	pos	IPA	frozen raw walrus meat eaten in bite-size pieces	#NAME?	писиқақ
pista1	pos	IPA	one who does things; helper; servant	pistengughtestekaaguq tamaavek ‘he was appointed to do that’; kiyaghtaaghmun pistekaat ‘he is the one behind their success in life’	писта1
pista2	pos	IPA	evil spirit	Chukotkan (R)	писта2
pistangilnguq*	pos	IPA	one without a helper or without one to look after him	ellnginaghhaq pistangilnguq awen kayusighyaghtughaqaat ‘they often go help the one who lives alone who doesn’t have any one checking on her’; akmani pistangilnguut nangllekigatiit ‘in the lower states they don’t have compassion for those who have no one to look after them’	пистаңилңуқ
pitaagh-	pos	IPA	to challenge visitors in competitive sports	"pitaaghmi pinilghiit yugwet kayaalqiikayuget ‘when they challenge visitors, those who are good physical condition win’"	питāӷ-
pitegsagh-	pos	IPA	to go shooting with bow and arrow	No information given.	питыгсяӷ-
pitegseghagh-	pos	IPA	to shoot repeatedly	No information given.	питыгсыӷаӷ-
Pitegseghaghvik	pos	IPA	pond and marsh area west of Gambell Mountain	"literally, ‘place for going to shoot arrows’; see Map 7 in Appendices; = Pitegsighaghvik"	Питыгсыӷаӷвик
Pitegsighaghvik	pos	IPA	pond and marsh area west of Gambell Mountain	"literally, ‘place for going to shoot arrows’; see Map 7 in Appendices; = Pitegseghaghvik"	Питыхсиӷаӷвик
pitegte-	pos	IPA	to shoot with bow and arrow	"pitegtuq ‘he shot’; pitegtaa ‘he shot it (animal or target -- not the arrow)’ / piitgutaa, pitegtututkaa, or piitgututkaa ‘he shot it (the arrow)’"	питыхты-
pitekesigniigh-	pos	IPA	to stand on one's toes	pitekesengiightuq ‘he stood on his toes’ /	питыкысигнӣӷ-
pitengllag-	pos	IPA	to hit something by flicking or snapping index or middle finger out from under ball of thumb	= pitengllagagh-	питыңльяг-
pitengllagagh-	pos	IPA	to hit something by flicking or snapping index or middle finger out from under ball of thumb	No information given.	питыңльягаӷ-
pitiya	pos	IPA	boiled reindeer gut	No information given.	пития
pivag-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > pivagru-, pivake-, pivag-"	пиваг-
pivagnaq	pos	IPA	favored child	No information given.	пивагнақ
pivagru-	pos	IPA	to be thrifty; to be careful with what one has	< pivag-?-	пивагру-
pivake-	pos	IPA	to prize; to value; to protect	pivakaa ‘he prizes it’ /	пивакы-
pivakumtaaq	pos	IPA	favored thing or child; prized possession; thing of value	No information given.	пивакумтāқ
pivesqite-	pos	IPA	"to be disinclined to act; to procrastinate, stall or delay; to be almost ready to act"	"ima pivesqitestaanga qepghaqamneng aqumtaaghtestepaglunga ‘oh my, he took up all the time during which I would have been working, by sitting here, and now I don't feel like starting to work again’; aawhkaghhaaneng pivesqitutkaqaqa ‘I've been putting that off for ages’; cf. pivigite-"	пивысқиты-
pivesqitugh-	pos	IPA	to be ready to do something; to keep handy	"angyaghteng kenileghnun pivesqilluku utaqiigut ‘they brought their boat to the launching chute ready to leave, and waited’"	пивысқитуӷ-
pivigilnguq*	pos	IPA	condition that is unfavorable for action	pivigilnguq esla ‘unfavorable weather’; siivanlleghet piiqut esghaamakisqelluta esla piniq quunpeng neqniighmun atuqesqelluku luuraq pivigilnguq esla kaatqaghhnayukan waakenghillemnni ‘the elders tell us to be ready to take advantage of good hunting weather as unfavorable weather can come when one least expects it’	пивигилңуқ
pivigite-	pos	IPA	to lack the time or opportunity to act; to be unfavorable (conditions) for acting	No information given.	пивигиты-
piwhani	pos	IPA	and so; let’s see now 	particle; used when one is groping for the right words to express his thoughts;  = iwhani	пиӱьани
piyaa-	pos	IPA	to stroll; to take a walk; to visit; to hunt by walking on the ice (rather than using a vehicle)	piyaaltung esnamun ‘let's2 take a walk to the beach’	пия̄-
piyaaniigh-	pos	IPA	to hunt by walking on the ice (rather than using a vehicle)	No information given.	пия̄нӣӷ-
piyaqe-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > piyaqlek, piyaqliigh-, piyaqnagh-, piyaqsug-"	пияқы-
piyaqlek	pos	IPA	one who is ready to carry on	"piyaqleguyaghtughnguq Sivungamun uqughtaaghyaqumi ‘he would have gone ahead to Savoonga, but he was short on gas’; piyaqleguuq sivuyagteknaken ‘he’s able to go on, so have him as a striker’"	пияқльык
piyaqli-	pos	IPA	to have a hard time; to have difficulty	piyaqliiq kayutkaghqameng ivaghineghmeng ‘he’s having a hard time finding someone to help him’	пияқльи-
piyaqnagh-	pos	IPA	to be hard to do; to be difficult	No information given.	пияқнаӷ-
piyaqsug-	pos	IPA	to have difficulty	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	пияқсуг-
piyekenghagh-	pos	IPA	to walk with tiny steps	qikmighaghhaat agalghwaaghaamaghmeng piyekeghaghaqut aanvigmun ‘the puppies are walking with tiny steps while staggering to the exit’	пиӥыкынӷаӷ-
piyug-1	pos	IPA	to walk	No information given.	пиюг-1
piyug-2	pos	IPA	to want something or to want do something	No information given.	пиюг-2
piyugaaghte-	pos	IPA	to give order(s)	No information given.	пиюгāҳты-
piyugaaq	pos	IPA	a game in which participants walk on a log or similar object trying not to fall off; walk in formation; march	No information given.	пиюгāқ
piyugraapak	pos	IPA	short-tailed albatross (Ciomedia albatrus)	No information given.	пиюӷрāпак
piyugsiqe-	pos	IPA	to feel twitch in one's hair	considered an omen; piyugsiqaanga ‘I feel a twitch’	пиюхсиқы-
piyugtugh-	pos	IPA	to walk quickly or briskly	atangan piyugtughvikaa mekelghiighaq meghaaghmun ateghyan ‘his father strode briskly over to the little boy who had gone into the pond’	пиюхтуӷ-
piyuk	pos	IPA	a person walking in the distance	Chukotkan (R); piyuk aghuliighumaq ‘the person walking stopped’; apparently a direct nominalization of piyug- ‘to walk’	пиюк
piyuke-	pos	IPA	to want to have (it)	piyukaa ‘he wants it’	пиюкы-
piyukuman	pos	IPA	gladly; willingly	Chukotkan (R); particle; ellnga piyukuman qepghaaghaquq ‘he is willingly working’	пиюкуман
piyutagh-	pos	IPA	to rush around; to take a walk	No information given.	пиютаӷ-
piyutqe-	pos	IPA	to make oneself attractive; to groom oneself; to put on makeup or fancy clothes; to get things ready for someone; to start someone off in an activity	kakinaqelghii panini kaamgegneng piyutqutaa aghnam ‘the woman helped her daughter get started in sewing a pair of boots’	пиютқы-
piyuwhaaghmun	pos	IPA	at the beginning; at first	Chukotkan (R); particle	пиюхӱāӷмун
puge-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > puug-, pugimagh-, puglegh-, puglleghragh-, pugnaan, pugnayu-, pugneq, pugsaqa, pugtaghwaagh-, puguluqe-; cf. pukaneq"	пугы-
pughighnanigh-	pos	IPA	to be deeply involved in what one is doing; be preoccupied; be absorbed in one’s own actions	ulimaaghmeng pughighnaniimaluku kingutaa lengaaq nagaqunghilkanga ‘while he was so absorbed in his ivory carving he didn't hear the bell ring and he was late’; cf. puughhe-	пуӷиӷнаниӷ-
pughpuqa2	pos	IPA	raincoat	Chukotkan (R)	пуҳпуқа2
pughpuqae1	pos	IPA	"edible bitter root of ""arctic carrot"" (Claytonia acutifolia Pall)"	No information given.	пуҳпуқаы1
pughpuuqa	pos	IPA	type of edible root (?)	exact identification undetermined	пуҳпӯқа
pughyuygae	pos	IPA	wind going the same way (as one’s boat)	"Chukotkan (R); anuqatagghaghtaa, pughyuygemeng angyam yugi telanangat nekeftiit ‘the wind picked up, and due to the wind going the same way as the boat is, the crewmen hoisted the sail’"	пуӷьюӥгаы
"pugimagh-, pugime-"	pos	IPA	to swim	pugimaghtuq ‘he swam’; pugimaghaa ‘he swam it (the length)’ / pugimaghvik ‘swimming pool’	"пугимаӷ-, пугимы-"
pugimenghhaq	pos	IPA	young seal; seal calf	No information given.	пугимынҳақ
puglegh-	pos	IPA	to surface (especially in the water); to come out (said of a secret)	pugleghtuq ‘it came to the surface’ / pugleghtaa ‘he brought it to the surface’; qitaaqa sikughagkun pugleghaquq ‘salmon surface with the ice crystals (as they form in the ocean)’; aksaqegkaq pugleghtaa ‘he revealed or discovered the secret’	пуглыӷ-
puglegha-	pos	IPA	to be floating	No information given.	пуглыӷа-
pugleq	pos	IPA	walrus breathing hole in the ice	pugleghet ayveghem aneghfigkii sikumi meghilngughmi ‘breathing holes are the walrus’s place to breath in the ice where there is no open water’	пуглық
puglleghragh-	pos	IPA	to recall what happened in the past	sugagluni qavngaq amyuutkelleghmineng puglleghraasimakanga ‘he got offended by her recalling his abusiveness in the past’	пухльыӷраӷ-
pugnaan	pos	IPA	inflated poke; life jacket	"also pugnaan; used in the dual, pugnaatek, for one life jacket; = pugnaaquta"	пугнāн
pugnaaqun	pos	IPA	inflated poke; life jacket	"also pugnaaquta; used in the dual, pugnaaqutek, for one life jacket"	пугнāқун
pugnayu-	pos	IPA	to be bouyant	No information given.	пугнаю-
pugneq	pos	IPA	"dish of minced reindeer meat, reindeer tallow, and snow"	No information given.	пугнық
pugsaqa	pos	IPA	sea water thick with slush ice in late fall or early winter; the beginning of ice formation along the shore; ice that has surfaced from the sea floor	see item 46 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	пухсяқа
pugtaaghwagh-	pos	IPA	to stay in one spot (of boat)	No information given.	пухтāӷӱаӷ-
pugtaghtaagh-	pos	IPA	to stay surfaced in one spot	"aghveq piiqaat tughwaaghyatni pugtaghtuq ‘they say there was a whale, and as they were approaching it it stayed surfaced in the same place’; pugtaghtaaghumaluku kaalluku aghveqaat ‘while it was staying surfaced they got to it and struck it’"	пухтаӷтāӷ-
pugtaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to stay surfaced in one spot	No information given.	пӯхтаӷӱāӷ-
Pugughileghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Пугуӷилыӷмӣ(т)
Pugughileq	pos	IPA	Powooiliak on St. Lawrence Is.; Southwest Cape site on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Пугуӷилық
Pugughillghaq	pos	IPA	site on Kiveepuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Пугуӷилҳақ
"pugughuq, pugughyi"	pos	IPA	fat on outside of stomach	No information given.	"пугуӷуқ, пугуӷӥи"
pugughyaaq	pos	IPA	bird net used in winter	"pugughyaaghluku ugani qawiimalghiit kangitegni ‘they caught a lot of birds at the ice bay by bird net’; ayumiq pugughyaaq atuqepigsaqangat ‘in the old days, they would really use the bird net’"	пугуӷья̄қ
puguluqe--	pos	IPA	to stir up sediment in a liquid	puguluqaa ‘he stirred the sediment up in it’ /	пугулюқы-
pukaneq	pos	IPA	foam; froth; suds	qaneghmikun pukanghuusan suflitaghtaat meghmeng nusugyamegteggu ‘when foam began to form at his mouth they put him face down after pulling him from the water’; cf. puge-	пуканық
pukfig-	pos	IPA	to ransack; to dig around in	Chukotkan (R); ellngan pukfigaqii sanqutani ‘he is digging around in his stuff’; = pekfig-	пукфиг-
pula-	pos	IPA	to go into the midst of a group of things in which one becomes hidden from view; to go between somewhat scattered floes of sea ice	No information given.	пуля-
pulataaq	pos	IPA	a whale eating which then goes under the shore ice	"pulataaq esghaghluku uplegusimaat ‘they saw a whale eating, and they went after it’; pulataaghet tamaakut atghaamaneghtupiggniiqiit ‘they say whales that are eating usually stay long when they dive’"	пулатāқ
puliisae	pos	IPA	policeman	puliiset ‘the police’	пулӣсаы
pultughaq	pos	IPA	fishing sinker	No information given.	пультуӷақ
pumsug-	pos	IPA	to pinch	No information given.	пумсуг-
pumsugek	pos	IPA	thumb and forefinger; pair of pliers; tweezers; vise	"this is a dual; pumsugegka ‘my pliers, thumb and forefinger, etc.’; the singular would be pumsuk"	пумсюгык
pumsugragh-	pos	IPA	to pinch repeatedly	No information given.	пумсюграӷ-
pumsugun	pos	IPA	thin strip of folded sealskin sewn in a seam; welt	No information given.	пумсюгун
pumsukegtaatek	pos	IPA	scissors	this is a dual; the singular would be pumsukegtaata or pumsukegtaan	пумсюкыхтāтык
pumsukegtagh-	pos	IPA	to cut with scissors	No information given.	пумсукыхтаӷ-
pumsukesengiigh-	pos	IPA	to handle only with thumb and forefinger (as to avoid being dirtied)	No information given.	пумсюкысыңӣӷ-
pumsukgun	pos	IPA	seam edging	Chukotkan (R)	пумсукхун
pumsumsi-	pos	IPA	to eat by picking food with fingers	"pumsumsifqaavek pinitun neghi emta ‘don’t pick around your food with your fingers, eat properly’; whaken pumsumsiighllanga? ‘can I pick around from this food?’"	пумсумси-
punegte-	pos	IPA	to strike with an explosive at (it – whale) to kill it	"punegtilghiimeng nutaan esghaatunga ‘I saw bomb striking for the first time’; taan’ga puneghqughaqaat ‘they are striking it with explosives out there’; puneglleghhaaten aghvengegkata ‘you, strike it with the explosive when they catch a whale’"	пуныхты-
Pungughmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	from the Punuk Islands	Пуңуӷмӣ(т)
Punguqusighmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Пуңуқусиӷмӣ(т)
Punguqusiq	pos	IPA	Pongokosit Spit by Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak) on St. lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Пуңуқусиқ
Punguuk	pos	IPA	Punuk Island(s) off the southeast coast of St. Lawrence Is.	the singular form is Punguq*; Punguuk is a dual indicating the two (main) islands (Ingalik and Puusuuk); the third and smallest island is Qiighqaq; see Map 6 in Appendices	Пуңӯк
pupigtaa-	pos	IPA	to get scabby sores all over	pupigtaaguq or pupigtaagaa ‘he got sores all over’ /	пупихтā-
pupik	pos	IPA	skin sore; scabby sore; scum on lake coast near drying water	No information given.	пупик
pupingqugh-	pos	IPA	to have a stinging sensation on one's fingers from touching a very cold object	No information given.	пупиңқуӷ-
puqig-	pos	IPA	to be intelligent; to be smart; to be quick to learn	puqigtuq ‘he is smart’ /	пуқиг-
puqla	pos	IPA	warmth; heat	No information given.	пуқлья
puqlangllaasiq	pos	IPA	heater; space heater	"used in the dual, puqlangllaasik, for one heater"	пуқльяңлья̄сиқ
puqlate-	pos	IPA	to be warm	"puqlatuq ‘it is warm’ / puqlalnguq ‘warm place, warm weather’"	пуқльяты-
puqlayaag-	pos	IPA	to be very warm; to be sweaty	No information given.	пуқльяя̄г-
puqlayug-	pos	IPA	to feel hot; to be sweaty	No information given.	пуқльяюг-
puqlegha-	pos	IPA	to have fever	No information given.	пуқльыӷа-
puqleghaaq	pos	IPA	warm weather in winter	No information given.	пуқльыӷāк
puqleghaq	pos	IPA	thaw	Chukotkan (R); uyghaget qiighnaamat January-m puqleghaghaneng ama ilangqullghaneng ‘the rocks are slippery during the thaw and freeze of January’	пуқльыӷақ
puraara	pos	IPA	slave	No information given.	пурāря
Pureki	pos	IPA	African; African-American; Black person	"probably so called due to the relatively dark hue of the skin of the Portuguese sailers (including those from Portuguese colonies in Africa) encountered by the people of St. Lawrence Island; … Richard Atkiskun. Aghvengyupigtuuq Pureki elngaatall. ‘… Richard Atkiskun. He was a Black man, vey good at catchin whales.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:122)"	Пурыки
pusguma	pos	IPA	droopy-eared dog or other animal	qikmiq pusguma qaga uglaaghighllagtuq ‘droopy-eared dogs are increasing out there’	пусхума
pusi	pos	IPA	cat	Chukotkan	пуси
pusigte-	pos	IPA	to pull back one’s hood	Chukotkan (R)	пусихты-
put	pos	IPA	port (left side of boat)	adverbial particle; see also tavet	пут
Putkut	pos	IPA	plateau inland north of Poowooiliak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Путкут
putu	pos	IPA	hole made on edge of skin for running rope through it to attach it to stretching/drying rack	No information given.	путу
putu-	pos	IPA	to make a hole on the edge of a skin for running rope through it to stretch and dry it	No information given.	путу-
putukaaq	pos	IPA	"a walrus hibernating in the water, laying on its back"	No information given.	путукāқ
"putukumyug-, putukumsug-"	pos	IPA	to tiptoe fast	putukumyugtuq ‘he tiptoed fast’; putukumyugaa ‘he tiptoed over or on it’ /	"путукумюг-, путукумсюг-"
putukuq	pos	IPA	big toe	cf. putu	путукуқ
putulghi	pos	IPA	loop of sealskin for holding lace to boot; piece of rope or string for stringing something	No information given.	путулӷи
putulqagh-	pos	IPA	to dance a jig-like dance	No information given.	путулқаӷ-
pututati	pos	IPA	the number two (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	путутати
putuugh-1	pos	IPA	to make a series of holes	No information given.	путӯӷ-1
putuugh-2	pos	IPA	to dance a certain dance related to whaling in which both the hands and body are in motion	No information given.	путӯӷ-2
putuulleq	pos	IPA	edge of skin with holes in it for lacing	No information given.	путӯльық
putuuq	pos	IPA	a certain dance related to whaling in which both the hands and body are in motion	No information given.	путӯқ
puu	pos	IPA	"shaft-type handle; stem of plant; handle of saucepan, skillet, etc."	Elngaatall qevuulluni pugimnaqutkesalghiimi qenwat alquutaghpegem puunga kaasimakanga. “Uggiiy!” pimalghii pekaamaghmi puumun uugsimaghmi. ‘By trying as hard as he could to swim he finally reached the handle of the big spoon. “Whew!” he said as he gasped and climbed onto the handle.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG.  12)	пӯ
puufqe-	pos	IPA	to become swollen on the face	No information given.	пӯфқы-
puug-	pos	IPA	to surface; to come up for air (of whales); to poke the head out from the water (of sea mammals)	puugtuq ‘it poked its head out from the water’ / cf. pukaneq	пӯг-
puuggaghaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to quickly change the subject of conversation	"iqlengiqutkellghaneng elqughtuaghluku puuggaghtaghqumakanga ‘she him corrected about his lieing, and he tried to change the subject’; puuggaghaghtaakun sighlatkumakanga ‘she confronted him even as he was trying to change the subject’"	пӯхаӷаҳтуӷ-
puughhe-	pos	IPA	to be amused (of a child)	puughhuq ‘he is amused’ / taghnughhaq puughheritaaghtuq ‘the baby is amusing himself’; cf. pughighnanigh-	пӯҳы-
puughhun	pos	IPA	toy; amusement; fun	No information given.	пӯҳун
puughseghagh-	pos	IPA	to lie and try to convince	puughseghaghpenaki taghnughhat ‘don’t to lie and try to make the children believe you’; taana ilamineng puughseghaghnaqlaataghtuq ‘he’s going to lie again and try to convince his relatives’	пӱҳсыӷаӷ-
puughte-	pos	IPA	to deceive or mislead; to kid or fool; to babysit or amuse	"puughtaa ‘he deceived him’ / puughlluten piimken ‘I was just kidding you’; kii, puughhneqegtuten elngaatall! ‘my, you are gullible!’"	пӯҳты-
puughtista	pos	IPA	babysitter	No information given.	пӯҳтиста
puuglluk	pos	IPA	suds; foam or froth; flotsam; residue of melted fat of a sea mammal	No information given.	пӯхльюк
puugpag-	pos	IPA	for a blister to form; to protrude from water (of sea mammal)	No information given.	пӯхпаг-
puugpagtaq	pos	IPA	flash; spark; the sound of a match bursting into flame	No information given.	пӯхпахтақ
puugpagte-	pos	IPA	to burst into flame	No information given.	пӯхпахты-
puugpak	pos	IPA	large wooden match (for lighting fire)	No information given.	пӯхпак
puugzaq	pos	IPA	beluga (Delphinapterus leucas)	the sequence za in this word is phonologically very unusual in Yupik	пӯгзяқ
puugzaq tugutelek	pos	IPA	narwhal (Monodon monceros)	"literally, 'beluga with a tusk'"	пӯгзақ тугутылык
puulqughruk	pos	IPA	stem of plant	#NAME?	пӯлқуӷрук
puumae	pos	IPA	boom holding sail out from mast; spar	also used in Chukotka	пӯмаы
puungqughruk	pos	IPA	stem of plant	#NAME?	пӯңқуӷрук
puunqughruk	pos	IPA	stem of plant	#NAME?	пӯнқуӷрук
puurqi	pos	IPA	"string of beads on short leather thong used for decoration at the closed ends of baby’s traditional snowsuit; part of the opening to the aagra, the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	No information given.	пӯшқи
puuru	pos	IPA	contrary to what one might have expected or wanted; on the other hand; instead; ironically	"particle; malghugneghet angyat aghveghniightut iwernga sivuliit aghuliitut; enkaam puuru taakut aallghit uka taglaghtut ‘two boats are out whaling; one is staying in one spot, and, on the other hand, the other one is heading back this way’; taginaqnikaput tengegkayuget taginghitut puuru allat waakenghilkaput tagiit ‘the plane we thought was coming didn't come, instead another one we didn't expect came’; Llaaghanwha mekelghiighhaak ivaghiniightengughtuk. Puuru yuuk mughunnanightuq. ‘And the two boys became hunters. The man, on the other hand, stopped going out to hunt.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 38)"	пӯру
"puuskaan, puuskaana"	pos	IPA	whaling harpoon or gun; darting gun	"the harpoon has an explosive charge which further drives it into the whale after first contact; plural: puuskaatet or puuskaanet; Enkaam taaqenghata, puuskaatet aghnam ighungita akulangiikun aghvequtaqiit. ‘And when these things were finished they take the whaling harpoon and thrust it (into the snow) between the legs of the wife (of the captain).’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:218)"	"пӯскāн, пӯскāна"
Puusuuk	pos	IPA	northeasternmost of the Punuk Islands off the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Рӯсю̄к
puutaraaq	pos	IPA	frying pan; bucket with handle	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	пӱтарāқ
puuve-	pos	IPA	to swell (often of a body part)	puuvuq ‘it got swollen’ /	пӯвы-
puuvlagh-	pos	IPA	to smell or sense something and be scared off (of sea mammals)	neghsam puuvlaamaa qantaghallillgha mughunniightem ‘the seal sensed the approach of the hunter’	пӯвляӷ-
puuvngiite-	pos	IPA	to have one’s swelling go down	No information given.	пӯвңӣты-
puuvyaq	pos	IPA	inflatable membrane in walrus mouth; crop of a bird	Chukotkan (R)	пӯвьяқ
puvalla	pos	IPA	ceremony held annually by a family or clan at the time of a new moon involving the offering of choice pieces of meat	#NAME?	пувалья
puvallate-	pos	IPA	to hold the annual ceremony at the time of the new moon	No information given.	пувальяты-
puvangitaghaq	pos	IPA	Pacific herring (Clupea harengus)	No information given.	пуваңитаӷақ
puve-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > puuve-, puvin, puvngellak"	пувы-
puveltu	pos	IPA	lemming (Lemmus sp.)	#NAME?	пувылту
puvin	pos	IPA	ruff on parka hood; fur trimming on hat	"also plural, puvitet, for one ruff; puviteten amaangwaat? ‘is your ruff wolf?’; = vuvin"	пувин
puvisaaq	pos	IPA	bangs (hair); fog that covers top part of mountains	Naama puvisaaghenka kepii. ‘My mother cut my bangs.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 133)	пувися̄қ
puvngellak	pos	IPA	one with swollen face or eyes	No information given.	пувңыльяк
puvrugh-	pos	IPA	"to become rounded and dull (of knife edge, pick point, etc.)"	"savika puvruqaq ipegsaghyaghqaaghsimaaq ‘my knife that has become dull has to be sharpened now’; ukistani puvrughyan muusimakanga ipegsaqiisqelluku ‘when his ice pick became dull, he had someone sharpen it’; cf. puve-"	пувруӷ-
puvug-	pos	IPA	to peck (of a bird)	puvugtuq ‘it pecked’; puvugaa ‘it pecked it’ /	пувуг-
Puvughpak	pos	IPA	Poovookpuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Пувуҳпак
puvughqu-	pos	IPA	to pick around with the beak (of a bird)	meteghlluk egtelleghni puvughqwaaqeftuq ‘a raven was picking around at the dump’; naghuyat esnami mallu puvughqaaqeftaat ‘seagulls were picking with their beaks at a animal carcass’	пувуҳқу-
puvugragh-	pos	IPA	to peck continuously or repeatedly	No information given.	пувуграӷ-
puvukiiraagh-	pos	IPA	to peck intermittently	No information given.	пувукӣрāӷ-
Puvut	pos	IPA	Poovoot Range on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Пувут
puya	pos	IPA	rancid residue of oil from blubber	No information given.	пуя
puyani	pos	IPA	smell of rancid oil	No information given.	пуяни
puygu-	pos	IPA	to forget	puyguuq ‘he forgot’; puywaa or puygaa ‘he forgot it’ / puyguyaqunaan ‘don't forget it’	пуӥгу-
puygutagh-	pos	IPA	to be forgetful	No information given.	пуӥгутаӷ-
puyughiitaq	pos	IPA	mat used to protect surface from soot when putting down a sooty pot or other thing	No information given.	пуюӷӣтақ
puyughpak	pos	IPA	vapor over an open area in the winter ice	No information given.	пуюҳпак
puyughraak	pos	IPA	slowly rising smoke; smoke rising at a distance	Chukotkan (R); tengegkayugmeng aliisimaaq puyughraak suflugmeng nunaaghmi ‘smoke coming out of a chimney at the village was visible from the airplane’	пуюӷрāк
puyughte-	pos	IPA	to darken (it)	qiipateng aghnat kakilghiit tagneghlimeng puyughtaqluki kakiiqut ‘women darken their sewing thread with a soft rock substance’	пуӥуҳты-
puyughuute-	pos	IPA	to spout (of a whale); to give off puffs of vapor or smoke	No information given.	пуюӷӯты-
puyumsug-	pos	IPA	to hold between thumb and forefinger; to pinch	pumsugaa ‘he pinched it’ /	пумсюг-
puyumsugraagh-	pos	IPA	to keep pinching; to pinch repeatedly	No information given.	пумсюгрāӷ-
puyuq	pos	IPA	smoke; soot	No information given.	пуюқ
puyuqe-	pos	IPA	to become sooty	puyuqaa ‘it became sooty’	пуюқы-
qa	pos	IPA	No information given.	particle; expresses exasperation	қа
qaa1	pos	IPA	"is that so?; okay?; perhaps; I wonder if; okay, go ahead then"	"particle; qaa agavek piyaqumtung itagnaghnayaghtuq ‘I wonder if we went there whether it would be okay’; qaa whaten pinightuq ‘perhaps it's better this way’; Apaay, ungipaghaa. Apaay, ungipaghaa. Ungipaghaa qaa Apaay. ‘Grandpa, tell a story. Grandpa, tell a story. Tell a story, okay, grandpa.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:14); Ukughsi, angyanga qaa? Enkaam qaa iguyaanga. ‘Hey you people, he got a boat, right? And then I’ll be striker, okay?’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:216)"	қā1
qaa2	pos	IPA	sore on head; impetigo	qaaka ‘my head sore’; qaaghllagluni ayuquq ‘she is covered with head sores’	қā2
Qaagaam Naayvaa	pos	IPA	lake-like widening right up from where Akfayagak Creek (Aqfayegaak) empties in to Niyrakpak Lagoon (Naayvaghpak)	see Map 4 in Appendices	Қāгāм Нāӥвā
qaagna	pos	IPA	that one outside; outside	"base: qag-; extended demonstrative pronoun; singular relative pronoun: qagum ‘(of) the one outside’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: qaagkut ‘those outside’; vocative: qaagyuq ‘you, out there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tesqagna or esqagna ‘that one outsid’e; localis adverb: qagani ‘out there’; terminalis adverb: qagavek ‘to out there’; vialis adverb: qaaggun ‘through out there’; ablative adverb: qaagken ‘from out there’; interjectional: qaga ‘there (out there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tesqagani or esqagani ‘there, out there’; qaga qaniguuq ‘it is snowing out there’; tesqagani igleghutaqut tourist-et ‘the tourists are walking around out there’"	қāгна
qaake-	pos	IPA	to put something up on an elevated place (as on a shelf); to put something on land (or ice) from a boat in the water	qaakaa ‘he put it up’ / qaakigu llivelghagnun ‘put it up on the shelf’; angyamelnguuk evinrude-ek qaakaak ‘the took the outboard motor in the boat and set it on the ground	қāкы-
qaakleq	pos	IPA	part of a skin boat (block set at point where gunwales join stern and bow pieces)	exact identification undetermined	қāкльық
qaakneghet	pos	IPA	herd of walrus on ice floe	this is a plural; singular would be qaakneq	қāкньыӷыт
qaalghwaak	pos	IPA	fine snow	No information given.	қāлӷӱāк
qaalkaqe-	pos	IPA	"to make sarcastic, insinuating, or pointed remarks"	"qaalkaqusimalukek nanevgam aghyughumakek ‘when they made pointed remarks to each other, the old man scolded them’"	қāлькақы-
qaalkaqu-	pos	IPA	to express a strong opinion	qaalkaquuq ‘he expressed his strong opinion’ /	қāлькақу-
qaalkaqute-	pos	IPA	to argue against each other	"sameng apalluqullutek qaalkaqusimalghii ‘they didn’t agree with each other, so they argued’; qaalkaqullghiit yugwem takuluki ineghsimii ‘the person went to those arguing and told them not to do so’"	қāлькақуты-
qaallgigate-	pos	IPA	to be a quiet person; to be reserved; to be taciturn	No information given.	қāльхигаты-
qaallgitugh-	pos	IPA	to make an important statement	No information given.	қāльхитуӷ-
qaallgute-	pos	IPA	to tell; to say something to	"qaallgutaa ‘he said something to him’ / Nanevgaghllagem ugategnilnguum qaallgutaa, “Kaamgegka ukuk aatikek qiighniilnguuk.” The old man near the exit said to him, “put on these boots; they aren’t slippery.” (SULUWET 95)"	қāльхуты-
qaallnaak	pos	IPA	pants with embroidery on the bottom	Chukotkan (R); this is a dual; the singular would be qaallnaq*	кāльньāк
qaallngu	pos	IPA	deep drop-off of bottom near shore	iqallugteng qaallngumi aghqellaluku sighlatkumakanga ‘they got a lot of fish at the deep drop-off of the bottom near the shore by seine net’; kiiwek tesamkuk qaallngulguuk ‘the river on the southside has a deep drop-off on its shore’	қāльңьу
qaalluugh-	pos	IPA	to go wake up friends early in the morning (of young boys) and tell them to come out wearing old women’s clothes	a teasing practice; naangita teghtughtaqegkangit qaalluughnayukatki ‘their mothers would wake them up before their peers could come by and holler for them to wake up and come out in old women’s garb’	қāльӱӷ-
qaalqaqwa-	pos	IPA	to argue; to quarrel	Chukotkan (V&E)	қāльқақӱа-
qaame-	pos	IPA	"to go out (fire, light, etc.); to be extinguished; to be eclipsed; for visibility to be limited by it being overcast"	"qaamuq ‘it (fire, light, etc.) went out’ / qaamtaa ‘he put it out, extinguished it, turned it off’; qaamtigu ‘turn it off’; tanqiq qaamuq ‘there is an eclipse of the moon’; Maamleyaaghtaa siqineq qaamaqngan. ‘It became somewhat dark while there was an eclipse of the sun.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 134)"	қāмы-
qaamkagh-	pos	IPA	to suddenly extinguish	eslallugem kenghet qaamkaghtestii ‘the rain made the electricity go out’	ҳāмкаӷ-
qaamkallagte-	pos	IPA	to be so stormy that nothing can be seen	"igleghat esla qaamkallagsan qerngughulluteng igleghusimalghiit ‘when the weather became really stormy, the travelers got together and traveled together’; qaamkallagulluku iflangwaaghamayalghii ‘he got caught in the snow storm, and he has gotten lost’"	қāмкальахты-
qaamkat	pos	IPA	"large quantity, herd, or flock"	Chukotkan (R); this is a plural	кāмкат
qaamlighneq	pos	IPA	embryo developing in a bird egg; egg yolk; inner part	"agum maniga qaamlighnengaqeftuq ‘the eggs are developing embryos out there (at the cliffs)’; manigyaghyughngaaghmeng qaamlighnengumanayukagu pimangisimalghiit ‘they would be getting some murre eggs, but they think the embryos are developing’"	қāмлиӷнық
qaamllug-	pos	IPA	to be very dark (complete darkness)	"iitqaghsalghiiminguq mangteghaq qaamlluguftuq ‘when he went in, the house was really dark because there wasn’t any light on’; qaamllugmi aanluni naagsimalghii ‘he went out in the dark and tripped’"	қāьльуг-
qaamna	pos	IPA	that one inside	"base: qam-; obscured demonstrative pronoun; singular relative pronoun: qamum ‘(of) the one inside’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: qaamkut ‘those inside’; vocative: qaamyuq ‘you, inside’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tesqamna or esqamna ‘that one inside’; localis adverb: qamani ‘in there’; terminalis adverb: qamavek ‘to in there’; vialis adverb: qamagun or qaamggun ‘through in there’; ablative adverb: qamaken or qaamken ‘from in there’; interjectional: qama ‘there (in there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tesqamani or esqamani ‘there, in there’"	қāмна
qaamqaghte-1	pos	IPA	to pull on a loop or noose so as to tighten it	qaamqaghlluku quyngiq ataasiq nuqneghaataghaa ‘he lassoed one reindeer and held on to it’	қāмқаҳты-1
qaamqaghte-2	pos	IPA	to suddenly or immediately extinguish	keneq maateghhaq qaamqaghtuq ‘the light went out suddenly a while ago’	қāмқаҳты-2
qaamtaasiq	pos	IPA	fire extinguisher	"also used in the dual, qaamtaasik, for one extinguisher"	қāмтāсиқ
qaamte-1	pos	IPA	to extinguish; to quench; to put out (fire); to turn off	qaamtaa ‘he put it out’ / qaamtigu ‘turn it off’; pegnem qaamtaat mangtegham kumalghiim kengha ‘they put out the house fire with difficulty’	қāмты-1
qaamte-2	pos	IPA	for weather to close in	qaamteghllagyaqminigu esla repall aanviggangunani talwa manughaghhaghmun ‘the weather became so bad that it was hard to even go out in front of the house’; cf. qaame-	қāмты-2
qaanngwaaghek	pos	IPA	toboggan of baleen	"usually used in the dual, qaanngwaaghek, for one tobaggan; cf. qaanrak"	қāнңӱāӷык
qaanqaghte-	pos	IPA	blow right toward and through the door	"tiintangit qaanqaghlluki puqlaghhneghmeng aghtughtut ‘it [the wind] was going right through their tent’s door, and they had a hard time heating it up’"	қāнқаҳты-
qaanraq	pos	IPA	small sled used in pairs for hauling boats	"usually used in the dual, qaanrak, for one such sled; cf. qanragh-"	қāнрақ
Qaaramka	pos	IPA	a particular clan; Even (ethnic group)	the plural is Qaaramket	Қāрамка
qaasghute-	pos	IPA	to overshoot; to go above; to travel on top of (it)	"neghsaq guusaghaa qaasghutaa ‘he aimed at the seal but overshot it’; angyat sukeram usingunateng qaasghutut ‘the boat, not carrying cargo, sped over the surface’"	қāсҳуты-
qaasghuute-	pos	IPA	to travel right on the surface of something	angyat sukeram usingunateng qaasghuutut ‘the boat was traveling fast without a load right on the surface (of the water)’; aghpumlami qaasghuutuq ‘he traveled right on the surface of the snow’	қāсҳӯты-
qaaske-	pos	IPA	to be covered on the outside by (it)	"qaaskuq ‘it has a covering on its surface’; qaaskaa ‘it is covered with it’ / Tamaana melqwi qaaskelluki atkukaqaput. ‘We had our parks with their fur facing outward.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:70); … teghikusaghllaget tugutelegllaget, mangunameng qaaskelghiit. ‘… large animals with large tusks, covered on the outside with thick skin.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 44)"	қāскы-
qaaslighpak	pos	IPA	overcoat	"used in the dual, qaaslighpagek, for one overcoat"	қāслиҳпак
qaasliq	pos	IPA	top one or top part; uppermost one; outer garment covering shoulders down to waist or below	qaaslighpigaq ‘very top one or part; uppermost one’; ukut qaasliit maqaghsugnighllaguut ‘these people’s coats appear to be warm’	қāслиқ
qaasni-	pos	IPA	to suffer a burning pain; to burn in one's mind as from anger or grief; to smart; to sting	No information given.	қāсни-
qaasninaq	pos	IPA	stinging or burning thing; grief	No information given.	қāсньинақ
qaasqaq	pos	IPA	highest level of beach; bank in front of village toward the sea	No information given.	қāсқақ
Qaasqaq	pos	IPA	west beach of Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Қāсқақ
qaatke-	pos	IPA	to obey	"qaatkaa ‘he obeyed him’ / Sigutenkuk Sugrugenkuk qaatkaqegkangak naayek neqekaghqameng saghnaaqelghiik, taawanginaq Paapgaq pingigalnguq, ighsanitalghii. ‘Siguta and Sugruk obeyed their mother and gathered things to eat, but Paapgaq didn’t; he was lazy.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 1); Tawatengwaaq eslallugughtestaqaa qaatkutkayugnunllu qaatkusigalngughnunllu. ‘He lets the rain fall on the obedient and on the disobedient.’ (Matthew 5.45)"	қāткы-
qaawna	pos	IPA	that one inside; that one toward the northeast; that one toward or at Savoonga; that one at the far end	"base: qaw-; extended demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: qawum ‘(of) the one inside, northeast, toward or at Savoonga’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: qaawhkut ‘those inside, northeast, toward or at Savoonga’; vocative: qaawyuq ‘you, inside; anaphoric’ abs. sing. pronoun: tesqawna or esqawna ‘that one inside’; localis adverb: qawani ‘inside’; terminalis adverb: qawavek ‘to inside’; vialis adverb: qaawhun ‘through inside’; ablative adverb: qaawhken ‘from inside’; interjectional: qawa ‘there (in there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tesqawani or esqawani ‘there, in there’"	қāӱна
qaayeri-	pos	IPA	to get blocked by ice in early winter with only a small breathing hole (of seals)	qaayeriniiqaat uglapestaaq neghsaq un’gavek atghaghvikiitkaq ‘they say there are a lot of seals that get closed in on the ice with only a little hole to breathe through’	қāӥыри-
qaayghu	pos	IPA	tree bark found on beach	cf. qaya; Nunaaghmi qaayghut egllumun kumaaqutkaqegkangit ama eslamillu. ‘The used dried up tree bark to start fires for stoves in camps and outdoors.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 134)	қāӥӷу
qaayghwaaghlleq	pos	IPA	water that has flowed on top or ice or packed snow and then froze; aufeis	qaayghwaaghlleghmeng meghtaamalghii ‘he got drinking water from the water that flowed over ice and snow and then froze’	қāӥӷӱāҳльық
qaazugh-	pos	IPA	out of place or out of sorts; odd	emotional root; qaazughnaghtuq ‘it makes one feel out of sorts’; qaazughyugtuq ‘he feels out of sorts’; the sequence zu in this base is phonologically very unusual in Yupik	қāзюӷ-
qafsik	pos	IPA	wolverine (Gulo luscus)	the wolverine is found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.	қафсик
qafsin'gu-	pos	IPA	to be how many?	qafsin'gutsi? ‘how many of you are there?’; qafsinwaat? ‘how many are they?’	қафсингу-
qafsina	pos	IPA	how many?	"qafsinat piziki? ‘how many did you get?’; qafsinaneng ayveghaghtat? ‘how many walruses did they catch?’; note the derived, or related forms, qafsinegyak/qafsinagyak, qafsinagneq, qafsin’gu-, qafsinkaghte-, and qafsinkuuraq & qafsinkuuragh-, showing that the base of this word behaves as if it were qafsineg- or qafsinag- at times"	қафсина
qafsinagneq	pos	IPA	several; a few	"may be used in either the plural, or the singular (but for a plurality): Qafsinagneghet mangteghat tawansaghtut. 'Several houses were there.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:172); Iwernga taam sivungani qafsinagneq tengegkayuk kaatkaaguq maavek salin nalugvigilluku, mekestaaghhaat tengegkayuget. 'Even before then several planes arrived here, when there still was no landing field, small planes.' (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:52)"	қафсинагнық
qafsinagyagae	pos	IPA	how many?; a fair(ly large) number (quantity)	"= qafsinegyaga; Elngaatall Uyiikinkut kinkut Komsomolnguftut atillghit, yuget qafsinagyaget. ‘Uyiiki and company were called the Comsomol; they were a number of people.’ (PANGEGH. 46)"	қафсинагьягаы
qafsinagyak	pos	IPA	how many?; a fair(ly large) number (quantity)	"= qavsinegyak, qafsinagyaga; qafsinegyak iqalluk tuguzigu? ‘how many fish did you take?’"	қафсинагьяк
qafsinegyagae	pos	IPA	how many?; a fair(ly large) number (quantity)	"= qafsinagyaga, qafsinagyak; Ingleghi qafsinegyagllaguftut, neghrugllaguftut. ‘It had a fair number of beds; they constituted a large household.’ (QATEP. 9)"	қафсиныгьягаы
qafsinegyak	pos	IPA	how many?; a fair(ly large) number (quantity)	"= qavsinagyak, qafsinegyaga; qafsinegyak iqalluk tuguzigu? ‘how many fish did you take?’"	қафсиныгьяк
qafsiniin	pos	IPA	which in a series	qafsiniitangani Lluughvigem tagizin? ‘on what day of April did you come?’	қафсинӣн
qafsinkaghte-	pos	IPA	to get or catch how many or how much?; to pay how much?	"qafsinkaghta? how many did he catch?; qafsinkaghsigu? how much did you pay for it?, how much of it did you get?"	қафсинкаҳты-
qafsinkuuragh-	pos	IPA	to be just a few	nulughyaghluni qafsinkuurameng kayusimaniiq ‘he went fishing and he only got a few fish’; angyaq qafsinkuuraq taan’ga aliitutuq ‘only a few boats are visible out there’	қафсинкураӷ-
qafsinkuuraq	pos	IPA	just a few	qafsinkuuraghhaat ‘a very few’	қафсинкӯрақ
qagallaag-	pos	IPA	to have waves so large as to impede or prevent travel	No information given.	қагальāг-
qagallaak	pos	IPA	large waves	qagallaagmi taaga ketiiqagut ‘they launched their boat in the (time of) large waves’; saamna qagallaaguuq salin angyamun ‘the west beach is still (too) full of large waves for boating’	қагальāк
qagegh-	pos	IPA	to burst; to pop open	qageghtuq ‘it burst’ / qageghtaa ‘he burst it’; siighnaq ghhuuqaa tuquuqam qageghtaa ‘the nail made the walrus stomach bag she had inflated burst’; cf. qageq	қагыӷ-
qageghqugh-	pos	IPA	to burst (many things)	No information given.	қагыҳқуӷ-
qageghte-	pos	IPA	to be or become frothy (of ocean)	"qageghtaa taan'ga meq ‘the sea out there has become rough with whitecaps’; anuqlinghani meq imaghllugughneghmini qageghtaqaa ‘when it becomes windy, when there are waves it becomes frothy’; telaanangat taaga qagheghtaq eslughvikaqaat ‘a sail boat is going into the wind to (check) the froth’"	қагыҳты-
qageghyug-	pos	IPA	to irritate the eyes	Chukotkan (R)	қагыӷьюг-
qageq	pos	IPA	rough wave on the sea; whitecap; sea swell	"qaagghet ‘whitecaps’; qageghllaget ‘big ocean waves’; Qavaghtiqluteng meghmi taangani, qageghllak. ‘They had spent several nights down there out at sea in rough water.’ (PANGEGH. 48)"	қагық
qagha1	pos	IPA	Eskimo dance where dancers dance sitting in pairs	No information given.	қаӷа1
"qaghaaya, qaghaya, qagha2"	pos	IPA	decoration on back of parka consisting of a dangling strip of fur often dyed reddish on the back	No information given.	"қаӷāя, қаӷая, қаӷа2"
qaghertaq	pos	IPA	thin narrow strip of wood on the frame of a winter tent	Chukotkan (R)	қаӷыштақ
qaghi	pos	IPA	low deep voice	qaghituuq ‘he has a low voice’; qaghingituq ‘he does not have a deep voice’	қаӷи
qaghiiq	pos	IPA	plant that grow on tundra ponds and looks like grass or reeds	"exact identification undetermined, or this may be a general term;  yugayaaghaq qaghiighem akulanganun iightuq ‘a young loon hid among the plants in the middle [of the lake]’; qaghiightuqaq naayvaq nunivagem qawaagan ighniviga ‘tundra birds lay eggs in lakes with plants in it’"	қаӷӣқ
qaghilugtaagh-	pos	IPA	to hum at a low pitch	No information given.	қаӷилюхтāӷ-
qaghleg-	pos	IPA	"to rise in the air (of a plane, hair in wind, bird, balloon, tarpaulin blown partly off, etc.)"	anuqem nuyaqa qaghlegtestaa ‘the wind is making my hair a mess’; safkaaghun qaghlekaghluku esghaqwaaghten sangwaa esgha miiksugtalghii taakwani qakma ‘please lift up the curtain and look around for whatever is making that strange noise out there’; tengegkayuget taaga qaghlegtut ‘the airplane is rising or taking off’	қаӷлыг-
qaghlegute-	pos	IPA	to mill about in excitement (of a group)	sangameng qaghlegutat? ‘why are they all running around?’; cf. qaghleg-	қаӷлыгуты-
qaghlu	pos	IPA	harness	"Unaami taghtughlutek aghnaghaam atami yaawaatikek tugumakek, ama quyngim qaghlungi tugumakangi. ‘In the morning after they woke up, the girl took her father’s reindeer sled, and took the reindeer’s harness.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 14)"	қаӷлю
qaghlu-	pos	IPA	to harness; to have harness-like bands on it	qaghlii qikmit ‘he harnessed the dogs’; Kaalluni quyngimun qamughtek quyngik qaghlumakek. ‘After she got to the reindeer she harnessed the two draft reindeer.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 14)	қаӷлю-
qaghluughi-	pos	IPA	to harness one’s dogs	"unkuseniighyaghnaqa qaghluughiiq ‘the person who is going trapping is harnessing his team’; Tukughma waakenghisatgu, aghulaqnaqngayek nengiighhaak taakuk, qaghluughisaghtughagka. ‘My host didn’t pay much atttention to the couple, so when they were about to leave I went out to help them harness their dogs.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:192)"	қаӷлю̄ӷи-
qaghma	pos	IPA	heat in air distorting vision; mirage	No information given.	қаӷма
qaghma-	pos	IPA	for there to be heat in the air distorting vision; to appear in a mirage	"qaghmaqun taagna esghaqaghhu! ‘just take a look at that mirage!’; qaghmii naayghiit Quutmiit pangeghtelta ‘the Chukotkan mountains are visible in a mirage, let's go there (meaning that the visibility of the mountains in a mirage should be taken as an indication of good enough weather to make the trip feasible)’"	қаӷма-
qaghminaq	pos	IPA	chewing-gum made from cracklings (fat-residue)	qaghminameng kaamaquq ‘she’s chewing cracklings (fat-residue) gum’	қаӷминақ
qaghpa 	pos	IPA	crown-like hair ornament of reindeer hair or grass	Taagken sikughllugtuqameng avayameng qaghpangllaghluku naasqwakun aatestekaat. ‘Then they made him put on his head a headdress of thorny branches (“crown of thorns”).’ (Matthew 27.29)	қаҳпа
qaghpaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to sew up sides of parka	Chukotkan (R)	қаҳпаҳқуӷ-
qaghrilghaq	pos	IPA	"grooved wooden disk used as a plug to patch a hole in a sealskin used for a float, etc."	No information given.	қаӷрилӷақ
qaghya-	pos	IPA	to boast; to brag	qaghyaaq ‘he bragged’ / qaghyatkaa ‘he bragged about it’; qaghyatuneq seghleghuuq ‘boastfulness is offensive’; qaghyatkegpenaan ‘don't brag about it’	қаӷья-
qagi	pos	IPA	wave on shore; breaker; surf	qagingilnguq ‘a place or time without big waves’; qagingiitaa ‘the surf is dying down’; qagingughsagutuq ‘it is now the time when the surf is often high’	қаги
qagim tughumghalgutanga	pos	IPA	octopus	"literally, ‘the wave’s wrestling partner’"	қагим туӷумгалӷутаңа
qagin	pos	IPA	"ice with wavy, rippled or washboard-like surface"	"also dual, qagitek, for such ice; caused by freezing of slush ice under windy conditions, makes traveling with a sled difficult; see item 47 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	қагин
qagingiik	pos	IPA	harlequin duck (Histrionicus histrionicus) 	No information given.	қагиңӣк
qagingik	pos	IPA	surf wave(s)	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	қагиңик
qagingughte-	pos	IPA	to come up (of surf)	Chukotkan (R)	қагиңуҳты-
qagiraq	pos	IPA	small wave(s)	Chukotkan (V&E)	қагирақ
qagughiitaq	pos	IPA	headband	No information given.	қагуӷӣтақ
qagughruk	pos	IPA	"highest peak of ridge, mountains, etc."	naaygham qagughruganun mayughtut ‘they climbed to the highest peak of the mountain’; Kentuqam qagughrugan asinganeng uteghtuq qaygeghtegpenani ‘he went back from right under the top of Kentuqaq without getting to the top’	қагуӷрук
Qagupalek	pos	IPA	third point on west coast south of Gambell; Kaghoopalik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	"literally, ‘one with a big (?) forehead’; see Map 4 in Appendices"	Қагупалык
qaguq	pos	IPA	forehead; brow; upper area of mountain	No information given.	қагуқ
Qaguq	pos	IPA	site at bend in lower part of Koozata River on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Қагуқ
qakegh-	pos	IPA	to taste bitter	No information given.	қакыӷ-
qakemna	pos	IPA	that one out there	"base: qakm-; obscured demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: qakmum ‘(of) that one out there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: qakemkut ‘those out there’; vocative: qakemyuq ‘you, out there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tesqakemna or esqakemna ‘that one out there’; localis adverb: qakmani ‘out there’; terminalis adverb: qakmavek ‘to out there’; vialis adverb: qakmagun ‘through out there’; ablative adverb: qakmaken ‘from out there’; interjectional: qakma ‘there (out there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tesqakmani or esqakmani ‘there, out there’"	қакымна
qakeq	pos	IPA	bitter taste	qaakghaneng apalluqluku uutghutaqa neneghmeng ‘because of its bitter taste I changed my mind about eating it’	қакық
qakeqaaq	pos	IPA	edible root of Parry's wallflower (Parrya nudicaulis); wooly lousewort (Pedicularis lanata)	cf. pekeqaaq	қакықāқ
qakiima	pos	IPA	"oh no, not again!"	"= qakima; particle; said in disgust or dismay when something occurs too much or too often; used with a verb in the optative mood; qakiima anuqlighli  ‘oh no, it’s windy again!’"	қакӣма
qakiimallu	pos	IPA	"oh no, not again!"	"= qakima, qakimallu; particle; said in disgust or dismay when something occurs too much or too often; used with a verb in the optative mood"	қакӣмалью
qakima	pos	IPA	"oh no, not again"	= qakiima; particle; said in disgust or dismay when something occurs too much or too often; used with a verb in the optative mood; 	қакима
qakimallu	pos	IPA	"oh no, not again"	= qakiimallu; particle; said in disgust or dismay when something occurs too much or too often; used with a verb in the optative mood; Allamengllu amyughwaaghnaanghitaghput. Qakimallu suflugalwaaqli! ‘We better not tease him ever again. Oh no (just think o	қакималью
qakiqnaq	pos	IPA	avid hunter	No information given.	қакиқньақ
qakiqniqe-	pos	IPA	to plan and prepare to go somewhere or do something	"angyaghuunnaluteng tesqaga qakiqniqutaqut ‘they are planning on going boating out there’; tevraghnaluni qakiqniqaqeftuq ‘he is planning on going seal hunting’; Taagken allgeghusama estugaghmeng qakiqniqunga tesamavek 1972mi. ‘Then, when I got it [the gear] from the store, I prepared to go to Southwest Cape in 1972.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:32)"	қакиқньиқы-
qakite-	pos	IPA	to have an aftertaste from eating something bitter	qakituq ‘he has an aftertase from eating something bitter ‘/ qakitutkaa ‘he has the aftertaste of its bitterness’ /	қакиты-
qakun	pos	IPA	when (in the future)	particle; qakun aanaqsin? ‘when are you going out?’	қакун
qakuqwaaqu(n)	pos	IPA	sometime later	particle	қакуқӱāқу(у)
qakwhegte-	pos	IPA	to plan and/or prepare for a trip	qakwhegtaqukut nulughyaghnaluta ‘we are making plans for going fishing’; qimugsighnaqet qakwhegtekat ima unaaq ‘those people who are going out on dogsleds have been getting ready all morning’	қакӱьыхты-
qala	pos	IPA	fur seal (Callorhinus urinus)	this animal is only rarely found in the Yupik area	қаля
qalepangi-	pos	IPA	to be outspoken; to be talkative	"qalepangitutanganeng naafqiinayukan council-enun agghilghiinun pisimangisimakangat ‘because of his being so talkative they did not let him attend the council meeting for fear that he would interfere with it’; qalepangilleghput pellaghuutuq ‘our talkative one left a feeling of emptiness by his absence’; Legan aghnaghhaq qalepangighllak ilagavaghqughllak. ‘Well, the little woman was very talkative and sang loudly.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:46)"	қалыпаңи-
qalepangilnguq*	pos	IPA	straight-forward person	Chukotkan (R)	қалыпаңилңуқ
qalepgute-	pos	IPA	to ride low in the water (of a boat)	"usipagllagluteng angyat igleghsalghiimeng qalepgutut ‘the boat had too much of a load and when they left and rode very low’; qalepgusalghiimeng sukamsugiighutii ‘when they were riding very low in the water, they were really slow’"	қалыпхуты-
qalghigh-	pos	IPA	to make non-speech vocal sounds; to whine (of a dog); to cry (of an animal); to bark (of a seal); to sing (of a bird)	No information given.	қалӷиӷ-
qalghighta	pos	IPA	male reindeer	No information given.	қалӷиҳта
qalghighvik	pos	IPA	time or month of heat of animals; month of the heat of animals	Chukotkan (R)	қалӷиӷвик
qalghiregte-	pos	IPA	to whine	No information given.	қалӷирыхты-
qaligh-	pos	IPA	to put on a gut rain parka	No information given.	қалиӷ-
qalighak	pos	IPA	outermost layer	"tengugem qaayngi qalighalget makregtekaaluteng ugmelengestaghaat ‘when they the outermost layer of liver is peeled off, it is really thin’; aghveghem tengugan qalighagi saguyamun  siikniiqiit ‘the outer part of the whale’s liver is said to be used as drumskin’"	қалиӷак
qalighaq*	pos	IPA	eardrum	"dual, qalighaak, used for one eardrum"	қалиӷақ
qalingllaasiq	pos	IPA	special needle used to sew gut raincoats 	Chukotkan (R)	қалиңльāсиқ
qalipak	pos	IPA	old gut raincoat	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, qalipagek, for one such raincoat"	қалипак
qaliq	pos	IPA	gut raincoat	"also used in the dual, qalik, for one such raincoat"	қалиқ
qaliqenghaaq	pos	IPA	dried gut as used for making rain parka; transparent plastic	No information given.	қалиқынӷāқ
qaliraaq	pos	IPA	raincoat (modern)	"also used in the dual, qaliraaghek, for one such raincoat"	қалирāқ
qalla	pos	IPA	sound of bubbling or boiling water	qallat ‘the trail of a sea mammal that makes the water churn’	қалья
qallaataq	pos	IPA	food that is (to be) boiled a long time	"unkuvaget qallaataaniiqiit inqun qallaalluteng pikayugwet ‘they say yearling walruses are to be boiled a long time to eat, so they boil them’; qallaataghtuunnaqukut ‘we are going eat long boiled food’"	қальāтақ
qallaqugh-	pos	IPA	"to bubble, boil, and churn"	"Qavaghyan aghsukestaghluku nunakun llikestaghluku ugkenga taana qallaqughllak tuguluku sigutangakun aghnam kuuvumakanga legan tuqulluku. ‘After the [other woman] had fallen asleep, she lifted her up gently and laid her on the ground, and then she picked up the pot of boiling broth and poured it in her ear, killing her.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:266)"	Қальяқуқ
qallaragh-	pos	IPA	to gurgle	Chukotkan (R)	кальяраӷ-
"qallate-, qallaate-"	pos	IPA	to boil; to cook by boiling or by simmering for long time	qallatuq or qallaatuq ‘it boiled’; qallataa or qallaataa ‘he boiled’ /	"қальяты-, қалья̄ты-"
qalleg-	pos	IPA	to speak; to utter something; to talk; to say something of importance	qallegtughnguq whaten . . . ‘he said this . . .’; qallegnanightuq ilagaghngaaghmi ‘he fell silent in the middle of his singing’; qallegnanighluni nagataa atani ‘he quieted down and listened to his father’	қальыг-
qallegnanighqe-	pos	IPA	to quiet (him) down; to leave (him) speechless by one's words or actions	No information given.	қальыгнаниҳқы-
qallegsaghagh-	pos	IPA	to pressure (him) to speak; to get (him) to say what one wants to hear	qallegsaghaghluku wetku ungipamsugtestaghput ayumiim kiyaghtaallghaneng ‘only when we pressured him did he tell us about the old ways of life’; qallegsaghaanneghmeng apamegnun anengani temngi aghyuughtesteghllagaa ‘she maneuvered their grandfather into scolding her brother’	қальыхсяӷаӷ-
qallegyugneq	pos	IPA	outspoken person; person who makes derisive remarks	No information given.	қальыгюгнық
qallemsuggaq	pos	IPA	quietness; silence; tranquility	No information given.	қальымсюхақ
qallevak	pos	IPA	coverall-like suit; baby's coverall with hood and with a flap for inserting a diaper; woman's hoodless reindeer skin knee-length suit with fur trim at neck and ends of sleeves and with drawstrings at the knees	"used in the dual, qallevagek, for one such pair of coveralls"	қальывак
qallukaq	pos	IPA	skin with hair from reindeer leg; legging made out of skin with hair from reindeer leg	No information given.	қальюкақ
qalluki-	pos	IPA	to process reindeer leg skin with hair	aghnam qallukii quyngim ighungi kepluki emta eggnayukatki ‘the woman cut off the legs of the reindeer skin before they could discard them’	қальюки-
qalmaawi-	pos	IPA	to be unsuccessful or unlucky at hunting; to not accomplish one’s goal	qalmaawiluni tagimalghii unangneghmeng aghtughluni ‘he came home when he couldn’t catch any seal’	қалмāӱи-
qalmagh-	pos	IPA	to summon dogs by making vocal sounds	No information given.	қалмаӷ-
qalmesam qawaaga	pos	IPA	wandering tattler (Heteroscelus incanus)	No information given.	қалмысям қаӱāга
qalmesaq	pos	IPA	reef; rock(s) right under or at surface of water	qalmesat awavaqun aagteki ‘go around away from the rocks’; qalmesaq talughngalghii tenpemaat ‘they ran into the reef that lies right under the surface’	қалмысяқ
qalmesite-	pos	IPA	to run aground on rocks or reef	"qakiimallu qalmesitaqitek aghqitaghami ‘how lucky, you might have run into the rocks in the shallows’"	қалмыситы-
qalpallagh-	pos	IPA	to respond; to make a move	"pegnem qalpallaghtestaa tuqlughrapagluku ‘he finally got him to respond after repeatedly calling him’; tuqlughngaamkun tusaqenghitem qalpallanghisimalghii ‘even though I kept calling him, on account of not hearing he did not respond at all’"	қальпальяӷ-
qalqalima	pos	IPA	axe	Taawa quuguluni qalqalimaqulleghtuftuq. ‘It showed signs of being chopped with an axe for firewood.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)	қальқалима
qalqalima-	pos	IPA	chop with an axe	"qalqalimaaq ‘he chopped with an axe’ or ‘he hit himself (accidently) with an axe’; qalqalimaa ‘he chopped with an axe on it, he hit it with the axe’ / yugem qalqalimaak nasqunghek ‘the man used an axe on the walrus skull’"	қальқалима-
qalqasiq	pos	IPA	navel; belly button	No information given.	қальқасиқ
qalqumigh-	pos	IPA	to turn and come toward one (of an animal)	"telanangamaluki maklagem qimagraghtaamaghmi qalqumiimakangi ‘while they were sailing, a bearded seal was going away from the boat and then turned and came back’; kateqneghet qalqumilghiit guuqaamakangit ‘they shot at the herd of walruses in the water that had turned around and come back toward them’"	қальқумиӷ-
qalta	pos	IPA	fish scale; scab; barnacle	cf. qerta	қальта
qaltaaghwaq*	pos	IPA	bucket taken when hunting by boat and kept near captain	cf. qaltaghwaaq (which the present form might be a variant of)	қальтāӷӱақ
qaltaawrak	pos	IPA	small or makeshift bucket	No information given.	қальтāӱрак
qaltaghwaaq	pos	IPA	toy pail; special pail used in a whale ceremony	"also used in the dual, qaltaghwaaghek, for one such pail; the wife of a successful whaling captain would take it down to greet her husband and use it to convey and store small choice pieces of the whale meat which were later used in a ritual celebrating the whaling"	қальтаӷӱāқ
qaltaq	pos	IPA	pail; bucket	"also used in the dual, qaltak, for one pail"	қальтақ
qalu	pos	IPA	dipnet	No information given.	қалю
qalu-	pos	IPA	to dip; to ladle; to scoop; to bail (a boat); to use a dipnet	qaluuq ‘he bailed water out of the boat’; qalaa ‘he bailed it (either container or liquid)’ / qalutuq meghmeng ‘he ladled out some water’; qalugu mesiigha neqem qayaaneng ‘skim off the oil from the surface of the broth’	қалю-
qalugyaq	pos	IPA	long-handled lance used for killing whales (and other sea mammals)	No information given.	қалюгьяқ
qalungtaaraq	pos	IPA	long-handled dipnet made from baleen for getting seafood	"used in the dual, qalungtaarak, for one such dipnet"	қалюңтāрақ
qalusiqaq	pos	IPA	pail used to bail out water from a boat	"also used in the dual, qalusiqak, for one such pail; qalusiqagneng angyam megha qaluteggu ‘someone bail out the water from the boat using the bailer’; meghutlugek qalusiqaqlukek qalugu angyam megha ‘bail out the water of the boat using the can as a bailer’"	қалусиқақ
qalusta	pos	IPA	bailer; person in a skin boat whose job it is to bail out the boat (and mix the gas)	No information given.	қалюста
qalutaq	pos	IPA	ladle	No information given.	қалютақ
qaluuku	pos	IPA	a certain line for a harpoon	exact identification undetermined	қалю̄ку
Qaluvik	pos	IPA	January	"literally, ‘time for dipnetting’; also given in various sources as November, December, December-January, and February-March"	Қалювик
qamaggute-	pos	IPA	"to do their parts, get their shares, have their turns, everyone of them"	"qamaggutut ‘they all did their parts, got their shares, had their turns, etc.’"	қамахуты-
qamagte-	pos	IPA	to go through all; to consume or be consumed entirely; to come to the end; to completely use up; to finish	qamagtuq ‘it is finished; qamagtaa he finished it’ / qamagtaa neqani ‘he finished his food’; qamagtaa akuzitkegkani ‘he saig all he had to say’; qamagtaa mangteghaq qaagna tunquneghmeng ungipam igaaneng ‘he passed newspapers out to the whole village’; qamagtuq ‘the end’ (said at the end of a story); this base is often used in the subordinative: qamagllukek atughaak mesiighek ‘he used up all the fuel oil’; neghanka qamaggluki ‘I ate them all’; qemaggluteng aghulaqut ‘they all left’; angyat qamaglluteng taglaghtuutut ‘all the boats came in’; atghaaqaq Ungazimeng qamaglluni iteghaata(a)? did all those who came from Chaplino come in?; Iiwleng mamlegmi kiyaghutkelluku qamaglluteng teghigat ama qawaaget ellmeggnun neqmeng ivaghiiqut  uflughluku. ‘On account of always living in the dark all the animals and the birds sought food for themselves by feeling for it.’ (YUPIGET UNGIP. 27)	қамахты-
qamagunginaq	pos	IPA	in one's mind; inwardly; without expressing it; to oneself	"particle ; qamagunginaq whangallu yakughyukaqa angyakun pilleghqaq anuqataaghaghmi ‘I too have been having misgivings about going in a boat while it's still a little too windy’; atightughtuq qamagunginaq ‘he is reading silently’; qamagunginaq aagtuq ‘he's putting up with things without complaint’; Qamagunginaq ugumiyugumaghmi, qayughllak nenglaqegkaqegkanga. ‘Inwardly he became angry because he (the other) had laughed at him.’ (YUPIGET UNGIP. 62)"	қамагуңинақ
qamanlliiq	pos	IPA	whale-gun shell that explodes inside a whale	aghveqluku qamanlliiqulluni guutuq ‘they struck the whale and the shell also exploded’; qamanlliigha mulaaghlluni guusimalghii ‘its shell took a while to explode’	қаманльӣқ
qamanlliqe-	pos	IPA	to keep something to oneself without talking about it	"qamanlliqaa ‘he kept it to himself, didn’t talk about it with others’ / apeghpenaan qamanlliqumaagu liisimakeghngaaghmigu ‘he didn’t talk about it but kept it to himself’; qamanlliqegpenaki iilqegllghet, qinuyugutnguut ‘don’t keep concerns to yourself, they make you sick’; liilightughlleq qamanlliqluku tawaten pimangisimalghiit ‘they didn’t keep the law in their minds without talking about it’"	қаманльиқы-
qamarila	pos	IPA	a certain old-time religious ceremony accompanied by competions	the winners of the competitions would receive prizes from the ceremony sponsor	қамариля
qame-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > qameqetaq, qamigagh-, qamiigh-, qamilgugh-, qamite-, qamiya, qamuq"	қамы-
qameqetaq	pos	IPA	a bone or the like dragged on the ground for puppies to chase	No information given.	қамықытақ
qamestaq	pos	IPA	fibrous fat under dark skin of whale fin	No information given.	қамыстақ
qamigagh-	pos	IPA	"to drag over the ground, floor or ice"	angyaghteng sikugni qamigaataat qaanratgun qaakluku ‘they dragged their sled on the ice after putting up on a set of little sled’; mekelghiiq qamigameng igleghtaquq nem ilungani ‘the boy dragged himself around inside the house’	қамигаӷ-
qamiigh-	pos	IPA	to make ready a load of meat to pull on ice	ayveghaghluteng qaanngwaateng qamiightughluki igleghtut qamigameng ‘they caught a walrus and loaded it up on the toboggan and pulled it’; unangluni qamiighluku igleghtuq ‘he caught a seal and loaded it up and left’	қамӣӷ-
qamilgugh-	pos	IPA	to travel together by sled	qamiyegput taghnughhitengllaghlukek qamilgughtukut ‘we made a shelter for the children on our sled and we traveled as a family’	қамилгуӷ-
qamilgut	pos	IPA	travelers (going together by sled)	this is a plural; the singular would be qamilguq	қамилгут
qamiskaq	pos	IPA	wood for building a sled	No information given.	қамискақ
qamisli-	pos	IPA	to make a sled or sleds	No information given.	қамисльи-
qamisluk	pos	IPA	large makeshift sled pulled by a tractor or bulldozer	"used in the dual, qamisluuk, for one such sled"	қамисльюк
qamite-	pos	IPA	to give something to take with one (especially a portion of meat from the site where the animal was killed)	No information given.	қамиты-
qamiyae	pos	IPA	sled	"used in the dual, qamiyek, for one sled; qamiyegken ‘your sled’; qamiskun or qamiyegnegun ‘by sled’"	қамияы
qamiyngwaaq	pos	IPA	toy or small sled	"used in the dual, qamiyngwaaghek, for one such sled"	қамиӥңӱāқ
qamsuugte-1	pos	IPA	for the weather to become poor with respect to visibility	No information given.	қамсю̄хты-1
qamsuugte-2	pos	IPA	to blink	No information given.	қамсю̄хты-2
qamsuuk	pos	IPA	closed in weather with poor visibility	Tengegkayuget qamsuugem nalunghitut. ‘The airplane did not land on account of poor visibility.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 136); cf. qaamte2-	қамсю̄к
qamugh-	pos	IPA	to pull; to drag; to tow	qamughaa ‘he pulled it’ / qamiyegnekun ilangquq qamughaa ‘he pulled the ice on the sled’; neqa anigukun qamumeng taglaasimakanga ‘he brought the meat up by dragging it over the snow’; angyat ilateng taglamun qamuumakangit ivenruutegket naavyayek ‘coming back up the one boat pulled the other boat when its motor broke’	қамуӷ-
qamughagh-	pos	IPA	to pull or drag by muscle power only	No information given.	қамуӷаӷ-
qamughaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to jerk one’s head away in a gesture of anger (done by girls)	No information given.	қамуӷаҳтаӷ-
qamughaq	pos	IPA	store-bought toboggan	No information given.	қамуӷақ
qamughqe-	pos	IPA	to compel to pull; to give someone enough of one's catch so that he must pull it home	llaaghanwha qamughqaanga neqeghllagmeng neqangisagumaluta ‘luckily he made it possible for me to have something to haul home in this time of need’; umyugiitutmineng qikmini qamughqepagllagem qimugsiiluni itegiit kiliqusteghllagumakangi ‘he is so mean and negligent that he caused his dogs to have sore feet with cuts by forcing them to pull so much’	қамуҳқы-
qamughsiigh-	pos	IPA	to pull for some distance	unaghsiq esnemeng quugkaaluku kelutmun qamughsiighluku kepughaa ‘he pulled a drift wood log from the coast to up inland and he cut it up as firewood’; qamughsiighumaluku kaalluku ilangita kayusiimaat ‘they got to him as he was pulling and helped him’	қамуҳсӣӷ
qamughta	pos	IPA	"animal (dog, reindeer, etc.) used for pulling a sled or the like; draught animal"	Chukotkan (R); qikmik taakuk qamughtenguftuk; iknaqepigtuk ‘the two dogs are used for pulling; they are very strong’	қамуҳта
qamughtaq	pos	IPA	tugboat; tractor	No information given.	қамуҳтақ
qamughtuq	pos	IPA	tugboat	"CAA-t sivuliq mangteghaghqaat qamughtughhaam, aatgha Bozo, tagitkaqaa maavek barge-ekun. ‘At first a little tugboat, named Bozo, brought the CAA house material here by barge.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:54)"	қамуҳтуқ
qamuq	pos	IPA	pulled or dragged thing (especially a load of meat)	qamuq taakwna yugem taglaaskanga eslegepigta sangawatuq ‘the load hauled by the man looks so big that I really wonder what it is’	қамуқ
"qamuun, qamuutaq"	pos	IPA	winch; pull rope or other pulling device; small sled with runners traditionally of ivory or bone used to pull a skin boat across the ice; tobaggan	"often used in dual, qamuutek or qamuutak, for one small sled"	"қамӯн, қамӯтақ"
qanaghte-	pos	IPA	to lean forward while pulling something or walking against the wind	"qaanghwaaghem qamuutaa aalluku qamughsiighem repall sivutmun qanaghqumaaq ‘he put on the rope pulling the toboggan and was leaning forward from pulling so much’; anuqmi aygulghiit qanaghlluteng igleghtaqut ‘those walking against the wind, have their bodies leaning forward’"	қанаҳты-
qanegh-	pos	IPA	to speak idly	No information given.	қаныӷ-
qaneghlliqe-	pos	IPA	to reveal confidences; to spread gossip or rumors	No information given.	қаныҳльиқы-
qaneghlluk	pos	IPA	one who reveals confidences or spreads gossip or rumors; mumor-monger	No information given.	қаныҳльюк
qaneghmig-	pos	IPA	to put into mouth; to chew tobacco	No information given.	қаныӷмиг-
qaneghmik	pos	IPA	thing held in mouth; chewing tobacco	No information given.	қаныӷмик
qaneghmiwaaghusiq	pos	IPA	oral thermometer	No information given.	қаныӷмиӱāӷусиқ
qanelek	pos	IPA	fortune teller; one who casts spells	Chukotkan (R)	қанылык
qanemsug-	pos	IPA	to incant	No information given.	қанымсюг-
qanemsuk	pos	IPA	incantation	qanemsugginaghqun aliightesimakanga ‘through incantation he caused the good weather to come at last’	қанымсюк
"qanengghuq, qanengngiq"	pos	IPA	mouth sore; canker sore	seghleghmeng qaneghmiwaaghpenang qanengghughlleqaaten ‘don’t put anything bad in your mouth otherwise you’ll get a mouth sore’; taghnughhaq qanengghughllagumalghii ‘the child got a mouth sore’	"қаныңӷуқ, қаныңӷиқ"
qaneq	pos	IPA	mouth (anatomical); split end of hair	"qaangha ‘his mouth’; qaanqa ‘my mouth’, qaanghen ‘your mouth’"	қанық
qangaari	pos	IPA	soft snow in spring that makes traveling difficult	Chukotkan	қаңāри
Qangeghsaq	pos	IPA	Kangighsak Pt. on St. Lawrence Island	see Map 6 in Appendices	Қаныҳсяқ
qangigaq*	pos	IPA	male's brother's child; nephew of a man through his brother; niece of a man through his brother	qangigaanka ‘my nephews’	қаңигақ
qangraagtagh-	pos	IPA	to nibble with crunching sound	Chukotkan (V&E)	қаңрāхтаӷ-
qanguma-	pos	IPA	to take or last a while	aghyuqagni qamiyek qangumagpenatek naavelghaghtuumaniik ‘it didn’t take long for his sled to break’; nallghusanqigllukek weni qangumaniiqaak ‘he repaired it and he said it lasted for a while’	қаңума-
qani-1	pos	IPA	to see a person off by going with him a short way	No information given.	қани-1
qani-2	pos	IPA	to commit suicide	"Tamaakut ama suicide-ekat qaniniiqegkangit. Suicide taana qaninguuq, yugtaanghilnguq yugtaq allakaghmetuq. ‘They called suicide qani. Suicide is qani, it’s not murder, murder is different.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:166)"	қани-2
qaniglluk	pos	IPA	heavy snow	unaaq qanigllugllaguyaghtuq ‘it was really snowing heavily this morning’	қанихльюк
qanigpak	pos	IPA	snow falling hard in large flakes	No information given.	қанихпак
qanigraak	pos	IPA	intermittent or light but continuous snowfall	No information given.	қанигрāк
qanigughte-	pos	IPA	for snow to start falling	qanigughtuq ‘it's starting to snow’	қанигуҳты-
qanigvik	pos	IPA	"snow covering narrow open lead in sea ice, looking deceptively like solid sea ice covered with snow"	see item 40 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қанигвик
qanii-	pos	IPA	to go on ahead of others	No information given.	қанӣ-
qaniite-	pos	IPA	to take supplies further ahead; to cache supplies on the way on which one intends to travel	No information given.	қанӣты-
qanik	pos	IPA	snowflake; falling snow	No information given.	қаник
qanilghagh-	pos	IPA	to start or go on ahead of others	"piyugullghiit sukangilleghtaghteng qanilghaqestiisqumakangat ‘while they were walking, they told their slowest walker to go on ahead’; qanilghaa, malighqaghnaaghamken ‘start of me, I’ll catch up with you’"	қанилӷаӷ-
qanimigh-	pos	IPA	finished; worked on toward completion	"postural root; qanimightaa ‘he worked on it to or toward completion’; qanimighngaaq ‘it is finished’, ‘it is already the right form’; angyam kuyagkaa qanimighngallgha nakmikumaat ‘they chose the keel of the boat that was already the right form’; yataaghqelluku wata qanimightaat ‘they got it ready and worked on it some more’; qanimighngalghii taani pigu ‘have that one that is already done’"	қанимиӷ-
qanivleghaq	pos	IPA	light snow	No information given.	қанивлыӷақ
qanlagigh-	pos	IPA	to have or give a tonsilectomy	qanlagightuq ‘he had his tonsils removed’; qanlagighaa ‘he removed her tonsils’ /	қанлягиӷ-
qanlagllug-	pos	IPA	to have tonsilitis	No information given.	қанляхльюг-
qanlak	pos	IPA	tonsil	qanlagegka ‘my pair of tonsils’	қанляк
qanlawaaq	pos	IPA	any gland	No information given.	қанляӱāқ
qanlengi-	pos	IPA	to get closer to (it); to approach	angyat taakwa qanlengiit ‘the boats are coming closer’; qanlengiluku liigiksaqmegteggu nunavak ‘they got closer and saw it was  a walrus on ice’; qanlengiighlluku enankin liigikiteggu ‘get closer and then see what it is’; aghveghniiq qanlengightuq ‘whaling time is starting to get closer’	қанлыңи-
qanlengukun	pos	IPA	recently	Chukotkan (R); particle	қанлыңукун
qanragh-	pos	IPA	to walk or otherwise go ahead of a boat that is being pulled over the ice to scout the way	angyalget kiyang qanraghtengwaaqut tawaten esavghaanneghmeggni ‘boat captains are usually the ones who go ahead to scout the way when a boat is pulled on ice’; cf. qaanraq	қанраӷ-
qantaawrak	pos	IPA	small container for odds and ends; needle case	No information given.	қантāӱрак
qantagh-	pos	IPA	to put into container; to wrap; to bandage	"qantaghaa ‘he wrapped it’, ‘he put it into a container’, ‘he bandaged it’ /"	қантаӷ-
"qantagha, qantaghaq"	pos	IPA	nearby area; relative (kin)	qantaghaq taakwna pagunghaghtuuq ‘there are lots of berries nearby’; taakut whangkunnun qantaghatut ‘those people are our near relatives’; qantaghaghhantut ‘they are very close’; often used in the plural:Naqam naayghaghllagennguq taagegkut aga qantaghani aliilnguut. ‘Consequently those big mountains over there nearby are visible.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:28)	"қантаӷа, қантаӷақ"
qantaghalli-	pos	IPA	to approach; to get nearer	No information given.	қантаӷальи-
qantaghante-	pos	IPA	to be nearby; to be close	qantaghantuq ‘it is nearby’ / qantaghanlenguq ‘one that is near’; qantaghanlluni ‘being nearby’	қантаӷанты-
qantaghaqun	pos	IPA	in the near future; shortly; in a while; a short while ago	particle; qantaghaqun kaallequt ‘they will arrive shortly’; qantaghaqungiighhaq pilghaaten ‘go soon!’; qantaghaqun aghulaqut ‘they left a little while ago’	қантаӷақун
qantaghhaq	pos	IPA	mother	"literally, ‘small container’"	қантаҳақ
qantaghqwaaq	pos	IPA	"packaging; container (e.g. sack, box, jar, etc.); eggshell"	Chukotkan (R)	қантаҳқӱāқ
qantaghwaaq	pos	IPA	empty container	"also used in the dual, qantaghwaaghek, for one such container"	қантаӷӱāқ
qantanguraq	pos	IPA	"pouch, often for tobacco, worn on belt"	No information given.	қантаңурақ
qantanguraq	pos	IPA	small container	No information given.	қантаңурақ
qantaq	pos	IPA	"container; wrapper; bandage, mother; uterus or womb"	"also used in the dual, qantak, for one thing, expecially one uterus"	қантақ
qantaqusiq	pos	IPA	"pouch, often for tobacco, worn on belt"	No information given.	қантақусиқ
qantiigh-	pos	IPA	to unwrap; to perform or undergo a hysterectomy	"qantiighaa ‘he unwrapped it’, ‘he performed a hysterectomy on her’ / qaniighumaaq ‘it’s been unwrapped’, ‘she’s had a hysterectomy’"	қантӣӷ-
qapanagh-	pos	IPA	to work fast; to be energetic	"angyaghtumi qapanalghiit piniqepigtaqiit ‘when boating, they really like those who work fast’; qapanaatmineng siku ayagaghtaa tenpenaqegkangat angyat ‘due to his ability or habit of working fast, he pushed away a block of ice (in time) that the boat was about to bump’"	қапанаӷ-
qapanaq	pos	IPA	energetic person	No information given.	қапанақ
qapengtagh-	pos	IPA	to get food by repeatedly diving into the water	"qapengtaneghmeggni ukigaghlluteng meghmun iitqaghlluteng eggmiighluteng nuugaqluteng ‘when kittiwakes hunt for food, they splash into the water going under and they go to the surface with food in their mouths’"	қапыңтаӷ-
qapigh-	pos	IPA	to skin an animal (or an organ such as a stomach) starting at the mouth and doing it in such a way that the skin is not split; to cut slits part way through in a circular design on the surface of a newly covered drum to improve the sound	No information given.	қапиӷ-
qapiighwtagh-	pos	IPA	to sail zig-zagging against the wind in a boat; to tack into the wind (of a sailboat)	angyat aygumun taan’ga qapiighwtaatut ‘the boats are sailing zig-zagging against the wind out there’; qapiighwtaghluteng tekeghin ivgaghaat ‘they went around the ice point by zig-zagging on a sail boat’	қапӣҳӱтаӷ-
qapiyeghte-	pos	IPA	to lose one’s voice from shouting; to get hoarse	"atughllagluteng unaami iglagit qapiyeghsimakangi ‘they sang so hard, the next day they had lost their voices’; chearleader-et iglagit qapiyeghsimii ‘the cheerleaders lost their voices’"	қапиӥыҳты-
Qapleq	pos	IPA	cliff near Sireniki in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Қапльық
qaprag-	pos	IPA	to make a move; to squirm; to fidget; to move around; to be active; to show signs of life	"qapragtuq ‘he is moving’ / qapragtaa ‘he made it move, shook it a little’; qapraglluku teghtughtaa ‘he woke him up by shaking him’; yughaghvigmi mekelghiighhaq qapragtuq ‘the little boy was squirming and fidgeting a lot in church’; qinuyuk liisigalnguq esghapagngaamni qaprakestaghtuq ‘the comatose patient slowly started to move’"	қапшаг-
qaprakayuk	pos	IPA	flexible thing; movable thing; wobbly thing	qawaak tuqunikan qaprakayuguuq salin ‘the bird you said was dead can still move’; aqumutam ighunga ataasiq qaprakayuguuq ‘one of the legs of the chair is wobbly’	қапшакаюк
qaprekenghagh-	pos	IPA	to make small motions; to slowly move about	No information given.	қапшыкынӷаӷ-
qapriitugh-	pos	IPA	to be constantly move around; to restlessly move around	"uugta angyat takuyaghluku uyavanlluni ateghtuq, nutemnguq qapriitulghii ‘the seal on ice that the boat was approaching went down, it was constantly moving anyway’"	қапшӣтуӷ-
qapruun	pos	IPA	knot used to connect a rope to a smaller rope	as when connecting the end of the main harpoon line to another which is attached to the harpoon shaft	қапшӯн
Qapsukalek	pos	IPA	Kapsukalik Lake on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Қапсюкалык
qapuk	pos	IPA	roll of fat on human belly; rolling sea	qapunguq ‘he's getting a roll of fat’; qapulguuq ‘he has a roll of fat’	қапук
qaqaghta	pos	IPA	woman's parka hood with a point or ridge on top	No information given.	қақаҳта
qaqasa-	pos	IPA	to not want (one’s company); to reject	qaqasayagulluku ilani unisimakanga ‘he didn’t want his company so he left him’	қақаса-
qaqasayug-	pos	IPA	to feel discomfort (especially from filth)	No information given.	қақасяюг-
qaqayuugte-	pos	IPA	"to feel better, especially after being ill; to perk up"	qinuyugllak weninguq qaqayuugtaquq ‘he’s feeling much better from his bad illness’; wata qaqayuugsimalghii ighivgaghniineng ‘he has perked up compared to yesterday ‘; sameng qaqayuugutaqat ‘what are they so perky about?’	қақаю̄хты-
qaqete-	pos	IPA	to nick an animal hide when scraping the blubber off	uqiighyaaghsuwhaalghiini qaqetinalghii ‘it’s easy to nick an animal hide when one’s a begginer’	қақыты-
qaqiighwtagh-	pos	IPA	for there to be a sudden gust of wind in a sheltered area	No information given.	қақӣҳтаӷ-
qaqiighwtaq	pos	IPA	sudden gust of wind in a sheltered area	No information given.	қақӣҳтақ
qaqiighwte-	pos	IPA	to experience a sudden gust of wind	"mangtegham uqiigha qaqiighwtaghllaguuq ‘the shielded part of the house is getting gusts of wind’; anuqlighyaqminigu qaqiighwtalleq iknaqughtaa ‘when the wind picked up, the gusts got stronger’"	қақӣҳӱты-
qaqilqa-	pos	IPA	to be undecided; to be hesitant; to have second thoughts	eslam seghleqaniim qaqilqastaa ‘the bad weather is making him hesitant’; qaqilqaaqut nulughyaghnalutengllu quugsaghtughnalutengllu ‘they are undecided whether to go fishing or to go gather driftwood’	қақильқа-
qaqiyugte-	pos	IPA	to be excited; to be happy; to cheer up	Chukotkan (R)	қақиюхты-
qaqlaghqun	pos	IPA	"rope used to attach pole to a beam on a summer house or the the hoop around the circumference of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	Chukotkan (R)	қақльяҳқун
Qaqlungighik	pos	IPA	Kaklungegek (Cr.) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Қақльюңиӷик
qaqsungiq	pos	IPA	black-legged kittiwake (Rissa tridactyla)	No information given.	қақсюңиқ
qaquuragh-	pos	IPA	to crucify	Qaquuraghluku tuqutestekaqaghsi …. ‘Crucifiying him you let him be killed ….’ (Acts 5:30)	қақӯраӷ-
qaquuraq	pos	IPA	cross; crucifix	"Kitum alngunak qaquurani tuguyunghilkumigu maliggnaanghitaang, enkaam whangamni itagnanghituq. ‘Whosoever doesn’t take up his cross and follow me, is not worthy of me.’ (Matthew 10.38)"	қақӯрақ
qarkanighnighte-	pos	IPA	to go out and about	"sameng qivghullelguneghmeggni qarkaghnighhnanighaqut ‘when people have grief feelings, they don’t go anywhere too much’"	қарканиӷниҳты-
qarqaghni-	pos	IPA	to be withdrawn (from the company of others)	No information given.	қашқаӷни-
qarta	pos	IPA	matted tangled hair or fur	Chukotkan (R); = qerta	қашта
qasaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to slap repeatedly; to clap hands in applause	ilagaghta qasaghquutaat ‘they clapped for the singer’; gginaakun qasaghquumakanga ‘he slapped him repeatedly on his face’	қасяҳқуӷ-
qasaghte-	pos	IPA	to slap with palm of hand	qasaghtaa ‘he slapped it’ /	қасяҳты-
qaseki	pos	IPA	stink	No information given.	қасыки
qasiggnanigh-	pos	IPA	to go to a certain place very often	igaghvigmun qasiggnaniitut liinnaqem ‘they always went to the school because of the desire to learn’; ilakumtaani qasiggnanighvikaa ‘he goes to his friend all the time’	қасихньаниӷ-
qasigte-	pos	IPA	to go to some specific place	No information given.	қасихты-
qasike-	pos	IPA	to agree with; to get along with	qasikusigalnguut ‘people who are always bickering’	қасикы-
qasiqaghqe-	pos	IPA	for there to be the cry of a baby walrus	qasiqaghquq ‘there’s the cry of a baby walrus’	қасиқаҳқы-
qasiqaq	pos	IPA	baby walrus; walrus calf	Awavani sikum qaaynganun uugtuq aghnasalek qasiqalek. Taakut ayveghuut. Qasiqaghhaq ingaghtuq naaminun mallegluni. ‘Way over there a cow walrus with calves hauled out on the surface of the ice. They are walrus. The little walrus calf lay down near its mother.’ (AANGHHAQ 67)	қасиқақ
qasiqi-	pos	IPA	to butcher baby walrus meat; to play the second part in a woman's ball game where each part is named after a different operation in sea mammal catching	No information given.	қасиқи-
qaspeghaq	pos	IPA	outer protective garment; outer layer; great-grandchild; cover	qergesek qaspeghalguuklu ‘the window also has an outer pane’; ayapghaatak nuverraqak qaspeghangllaghqek ‘make an outer protective cover for the knitted mittens’; anigu sikughnakaq qanigllugughlluni qaspeghighaa ‘the snow that became icy was covered by fresh snow in the big snowfall’; cf. qaspighte-	қаспыӷақ
qaspighneq	pos	IPA	large pile of things; heap	yugem qaspighneq amiq akikaa 22-mun suflugangusiqaa ‘the man bartered a goodly pile of skins for a 22 rifle’	қаспиӷнық
qaspighte-	pos	IPA	to pile up; to put on or wear outer layer(s) of clothing	No information given.	қаспиҳты-
qaspighun	pos	IPA	"piled up fairly thin layers of sea ice, safe to walk on though each piece would not be"	see item 49 on list in Oozeva 2004	қаспиӷун
qasqite-	pos	IPA	to reach the top	qasqituq ‘he reached the top’ /	қасқиты-
qasquviik	pos	IPA	care; soft touch (as in ‘with a soft touch’); light touch; vagueness	"akuzillgha qasquviik tusaqniitngwaaghtuq ‘he speaks so softly that it is not understandable’; tapghaghpawaaq sakeqsugumaaq qasquviigmeng nengnnaken ‘the twine breaks easily, so stretch it carefully’; qasquviigmeng saaftaa ‘he touched it softly’; qasquviigmeng akuziiq ‘he spoke vaguely’"	қасқувӣк
qasuq	pos	IPA	good weather after a storm	"qasaani uum angyaghuullequt ‘after this storm, they will go boating’; qasuneghsighaqaat igleghqaannaluteng ‘they are waiting for the storm to clear up, so they can all leave’"	қасуқ
qategh-	pos	IPA	to be white	qateghtuq 'it is white' / qatelghii 'white thing'	қатыӷ-
qateghlluk	pos	IPA	"calm, smooth, glassy, water"	qateghllugmi igleghhneq teghignaghtuq 'traveling on glassy water is enjoyable'	қатыҳльюк
qateghnaq	pos	IPA	white-out weather conditions	No information given.	қатыӷнақ
qateghrakegtaq	pos	IPA	very white thing	No information given.	қатыӷракыхтақ
qateghrapak	pos	IPA	slush sea ice that has hardened enough to give an illusory impression of being safe for walking	truly white in color in contrast to more solid ice; see item 50 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қатыӷрапак
qateghrewaaq	pos	IPA	off-white thing; McKay's bunting (Plectrophenax hyperboreus); snow bunting (Plectrophenax nivalis)	No information given.	қатыӷрыӱāқ
qateghtekaq	pos	IPA	white-haired old man	No information given.	қатыҳтыкақ
qateghyiighaq*	pos	IPA	little bird	"Iiwen, Qateghyiighaghhaay, meghtanghilkuvek, ighsakuvek , tuqulluten, gaaghluten, neghelleqamken. ‘See here, little bitty bird, if you don’t pack water, if you refuse, I’ll kill you, cook and eat you.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 32)"	қатыӷӥӣӷақӮ
qategmigute-	pos	IPA	to land chest or belly down	"yuuk qiighnilluni sikukun qategmigutuq ‘a man slipped and landed on the ice on the front of his body’; tengegkayugwem itegani aanestegpenaki  qategmigutmeng nalugtuq ‘the plane didn’t put its landing gear out, so it landed on its belly’"	қатыгмигуты-
qatek	pos	IPA	bird's breast	qaatgit ‘their breasts’	қатык
qatelghii	pos	IPA	white thing; arctic fox (Alopex lagopus)	No information given.	қатылӷӣ
qatepak	pos	IPA	common eider (Somateria mollissima)	specifically the male	қатыпак
qati-	pos	IPA	to string bird breasts and hang them outside to dry	No information given.	қати-
qatmigtaq	pos	IPA	boom (of a sail); pole at bottom of sail; pole used in physical training	No information given.	қатмихтақ
qatmik	pos	IPA	long wooden pole carried in a boat and used for pushing ice away	qatmigetlu uygulluki qalugyamun qalugyaasiqaqiit ‘they add ice-pushing poles as whaling lances fastening them as extensions on the (actual) whaling lance’	қатмьик
qavaa-	pos	IPA	to be asleep	qavaaguq 'he is asleep' / qavaawa(a)? ‘is he asleep?’	қавā-
qavaasiq	pos	IPA	pajamas	"used in the dual, qavaasik, for one pair of pajamas"	қавāсиқ
qavagh-	pos	IPA	to sleep; to fall asleep	qavaghtuq 'he slept' /	қаваӷ-
qavaghni-	pos	IPA	to be sleepy	qavaghniiq 'he is sleepy' /	қаваӷни-
qavaghsiq	pos	IPA	yearling bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)	cf. qavagh-	қаваҳсиқ
qavaghtagh-	pos	IPA	"to stay several nights in the ocean, ice or wilderness; to camp out"	angyat mellaalluki taan’gani qavaghtaghtut ‘a boat was trapped by ice in the ocean so they stayed several nights out there’; nunaaghmi yuuk ullghitiighulluni qavaghtaamalghii ‘a man broke down on his wheeled/tracked vehicle in the tundra and stayed several nights out there’	қаваҳтаӷ-
qavaghvik	pos	IPA	bed; bedroom; place to sleep	No information given.	қаваӷвик
qavaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to oversleep	No information given.	қава́ӷӱāӷ-
Qavalghak	pos	IPA	southern end of Kavalghak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Қавалӷак
qavalighraq	pos	IPA	walrus sleeping in water with its head out	Chukotkan (R)	қавалиӷрақ
qavaneghpalluq	pos	IPA	deep or late sleeper	No information given.	қаваныҳпальюқ
qavangsi-	pos	IPA	to take a nap; to dose off	No information given.	қаваңси-
qavangugh-	pos	IPA	to dream	No information given.	қаваңуӷ-
qavangughtaa-	pos	IPA	to have repeated dreams about one thing; to repeatedly have dreams	No information given.	қаваңуҳтā-
qavangughtugh-	pos	IPA	to dream	aghnaq qavangughtuq aghvilghii ‘the woman had a dream of going across to the mainland’	қаваңуҳтуӷ-
qavanguq	pos	IPA	a dream	No information given.	қаваңуқ
qavangurruuk	pos	IPA	nightmare	No information given.	қаваңуӷушӯк
qavaq	pos	IPA	a day and a night (in duration); sleep	"Estamat qavat atughluki nemnun aglaghllequnga. ‘I will be going home after four days.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 49); Kiyang pingayu whanga qavaghlluki peghqightaataqaqanka, pingayu qavaq. ‘It usually took me three days to break them in, three days.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:90)"	қавақ
qavayiilliqe-	pos	IPA	toss and turn in one’s sleep	Chukotkan (R)	қаваӥӣльықы-
qavigh-	pos	IPA	slanted; diagonal	"postural root; qavightuq ‘it got slanted’; qavightaa ‘he slanted it, put it at an angle’; qavighngaaq ‘it is slanted’; qavimun ‘diagonally’"	қавиӷ-
qaviighte-	pos	IPA	to disturb one's sleep	No information given.	қавӣҳты-
qaviighute-	pos	IPA	to reveal one’s dream to (him)	qaviighutaa ‘he told him his dream’	қавӣӷуты-
qaviighyuketaq	pos	IPA	light sleeper	No information given.	қавӣӷьюкытақ
qavini-	pos	IPA	to be half-awake	Chukotkan (R)	кавини-
qaviri-	pos	IPA	to have difficulty waking up	No information given.	қавири-
qavite-	pos	IPA	to tell one's dreams to (him)	qavitaa ‘he told him his dreams’ /	қавиты-
qavlegh-	pos	IPA	to shimmer; to glitter; to be shiny	"qavleqegtaq ‘glittery thing’; = evlegh-, qelmegh-, uvlegh-"	қавлыӷ-
qavngaghhaaneng	pos	IPA	for some time in the past	particle	қавңаҳāның
qavngaghllaggaaneng	pos	IPA	for a very long time (many years) in the past	particle	қавңаҳльяхāның
qavngaghniistun	pos	IPA	as in the past	particle: qavngaghniistun eslallugtunaquq ‘it is going to be rainy as in the past’	қавңаӷнӣстун
qavngaghtaq	pos	IPA	thing of the past	No information given.	қавңаҳтақ
qavngalqinaq	pos	IPA	quite a while ago	particle; qavngalqinaq Quutmiit maapikayuguyaghtut ‘Chukotkans used to come here for visits quite a while back’; qinuyukaaguq qavngalqinaq ima ‘he has been sick for quite a while’	қавңальқинақ
qavnganghhaq	pos	IPA	recently; a few days ago	particle	қавңа́нҳақ
qavngaq	pos	IPA	when (in the past  past); some time ago	particle: qavngaq kaasin? ‘when did you arrive?’; qavngaq kaatuq ‘he arrived some time ago’	қавңақ
qavngarugllaggaaneng	pos	IPA	for a long time in the past	particle	қавңарухльяхāның
"qavraan, qavraataq"	pos	IPA	large ladle; stirring spoon	No information given.	"қаврāн, қаврāтақ"
qavraataq	pos	IPA	gulch; ravine	"also used in the plural, qavraatat, for one ravine"	қаврāтақ
Qavraatat	pos	IPA	ravine on northwest side of Ivekan Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	No information given.	Қаврāтат
qavragh-	pos	IPA	to mingle; to join the crowd; to lose an artifact which one has dug up by its mixing with the debris from the digging	No information given.	қавраӷ-
"qavreq, qavraq"	pos	IPA	walrus migrating north after the ice has gone	"qavreq naghughqaghtuq taaga elngaatall ‘oh my, so many walrus have been seen migrating north’; qavreghyaghtuq ‘he is hunting migrating walrus’"	"қаврық, қаврақ"
qawa	pos	IPA	sharp curve on slope of mountain	Chukotkan (V&E)	қаӱа
Qawaagem Ateghviga	pos	IPA	September	"literally, 'the time of (baby) birds going down (from nests)'"	Қаӱāгым Атыӷвига
qawaagllugtagh-	pos	IPA	to interfere; to get in the way of others	qawaagllugtaamaniiquq uqlighlleghhii ilaminun nuuget awavaghtaqluki ‘he said he had interfered with the others and caused the seals to stay away’; tuumkun nekeglluteng qawaagllugtaghniit ‘they said they placed themselves on the trail and got in the way’	қаӱāхльухтаӷ-
qawaagniigh-	pos	IPA	to hunt birds	qawaagniightuq ‘he hunted birds’ /	қаӱāгнӣӷ-
qawaagniighusiq	pos	IPA	bird hunting device; shotgun	No information given.	қаӱāгнӣӷусиқ
qawaagpak	pos	IPA	golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos); legendary large bird that can carry off people	No information given.	қаӱāхпак
qawaagyagh-	pos	IPA	to go bird-hunting	qawaagyaghtuq ‘he went bird-hunting’ /	қаӱāгяӷ-
qawaagyak	pos	IPA	flock of ducks	"sometimes used in the plural, qawaagyaget, for one flock"	қаӱāгьяк
qawaagyaq	pos	IPA	bird hunter	No information given.	қаӱāяқ
qawaak	pos	IPA	bird; fowl	"any bird other than a small bird; qawaaget ‘birds’; Kiigmi nunaaghmelnguut yuget kiyang unangniighet neghsameng, qawaagmengllu. ‘In the summer people at the camp hunt mostly seals and waterfowl.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140)"	қаӱāк
qawaamsighaq	pos	IPA	little bird; birdie	"Aghnaghaghhaam pimakanga, “Qawaamsighaay, meghtaa.” ‘The little girl said, “Birdie, fetch water.”’ (AANGHHAQ 29)"	қаӱāмсиӷақ
qawaaperaaq	pos	IPA	chicken (domestic)	Chukotkan (R)	қаӱāпырāқ
qawaapik	pos	IPA	wild duck	No information given.	қаӱāпик
qawaaqaaqegte-	pos	IPA	to have clear cloudless weather	Chukotkan (V&E)	қаӱāқāқыхты
qawawaaq1	pos	IPA	small carved ivory human figurine played with by girls	No information given.	қаӱаӱāқ1
qawawaaq2	pos	IPA	oarlock on boat	No information given.	қаӱаӱāқ2
qawii-	pos	IPA	to catch lots of birds	qawaagyat qawiisimalghiit ‘the bird hunters caught lots of birds’; upenghami alqameng qawiinapigtuq ‘spring is a good time to catch a lot of murres’	қаӱӣ-
qawiighneq	pos	IPA	dead whale found out at sea	No information given.	қаӱӣӷнық
qaya	pos	IPA	cave	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	қая
qayaawaq	pos	IPA	frost	Chukotkan	қая̄ӱақ
qayae	pos	IPA	top; surface	qaaynga ‘its surface’; sikum qaaynganituq ‘it is on the surface of the ice’; qayegkeni ‘on its surface (considered here as a dual)’’	қаяы
qayaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to ride in or travel by kayak	"qayaghtughtuq ‘he is riding a kayak’; qayaghtughaa ‘he is riding over it (lake, bay, etc.) in a kayak’ /"	қаяҳтуӷ-
qayaq	pos	IPA	kayak; cradle	qayaa ‘his kayak’; qayiit ‘their kayaks’; qayani ‘in the kayaks’ or ‘his own kayak’; qayaani ‘in his kayak’; Taghnughhaqa qayangumaaq whaa. ‘My baby has a cradle now.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 139)	қаяқ
qayayaygay	pos	IPA	oh-oh-oh!	particle; Chukotkan (R); qayayaygay! ukaqenghhaqa upughanepiguuq ‘oh! oh! oh! the new daughter-in-law is really hospitable’	қаяяӥгаӥ
qayeghpigaq	pos	IPA	highest peak of a mountain; highest level; top	No information given.	қаӥыҳпигақ
qayeligh-	pos	IPA	to cover; to put on outer layer	maqaghiitaq qayelighaa ‘he put a second layer of insulation on it’	қаӥылиӷ-
qayemgu	pos	IPA	tree bark; coating of ice or frost on beach from wind-blown ocean spray making surface slippery and walking difficult	see item 51 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қаӥымгу
qayengestagh-	pos	IPA	to drink hot beverage while doing something else; to quickly have a cup of tea or other hot beverage	"qepghaallghiit qayengestaataqut ‘the workers are having tea while working’; qayengestaghvik kaasan qayuutut ‘when quick tea time came, they had tea’"	қаӥыңыстаӷ-
qayengnaqi-	pos	IPA	to make clothes for the family	"neghighluku aghnat qayengnaqistenguyalghiit ‘in the old days, the women were the ones who made the clothes for the family’"	қаӥыңнақи-
qayetghute-	pos	IPA	to exceed in value; to do more than needed; to go beyond what's necessary	qayetghulluku akinga tukfighaa ‘he bought it for more than it was worth’; neghsam amiiraaneng tuunaanga qulligkaneng qayetghutaaghaghluku ‘he gave me more sealskins than necessary for making hunting pants’	қаӥытхҳуты-
qaygeghqe-	pos	IPA	to uncover; to discover; to bring to the surface; to pull out from under	uglaq amyak qaygeghqaa iiglluni mangteghilleghni ‘he uncovered a large amount of mussel shells at the old village site’; qaygeghqaa sangwaa nallukegkaghput aksaqegkaayalghii efqughraq allgeghhnaqneghmeng ‘so that justice might prevail he brought to light a lot of secrets not previously known to us’	қаӥгыҳқы-
qaygeghte-	pos	IPA	to reach the top	Iiwenllu quulngughutanga aghneq qukaghtaquq naayghamun qaygeghsimalghii. ‘Then on the tenth day in the middle of the day he reached the top of the mountain.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 19)	қаӥгыҳты-
"qayiigrugtagh-, qayiigtagh-"	pos	IPA	to make a echoing hollow sound	"qayiigrugtaghtuq yuuk mesiilghutak drum-ek kaagtughyamikek ‘the man made the empty, hollow sounds when he hammered on the oil drum’; mekelghiighhaq imiilngughmi mangteghami araquluni qayiigrugtaghtuq ‘the little boy shouted inside the empty house making a hollow empty sound’"	"қаӥӣгрухтаӷ-, қаӥӣхтаӷ-"
"qayiik, qayiigruk"	pos	IPA	hollow echoing sound	No information given.	"қаӥӣк, қаӥӣгрук"
Qayillghet	pos	IPA	site to north of Dovelawik Bay (Tevleghak) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 7 in Appendices	Қаӥильҳыт
qayngun	pos	IPA	probably; evidently	"particle; also qayngunllu, and qayngunqun; Kaviighhaam pii, “Qayngunqun igiiterugumangillaataghtuten!” ‘Fox replied, “I bet, as usual, you were up to your old tricks again!”’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:234)"	қаӥңун
qayug-	pos	IPA	"to strike with an adze when carving; to shape, form or create (as by carving); to dig with the front leg "	qayugaa unaghsiq ‘he struck the wood with an adze’	қаюг-
qayugh-	pos	IPA	"to drink tea, broth or other hot beverage"	qayughtuq ‘he drank a hot beverage’	қаюӷ-
qayugham	pos	IPA	so then	"particle; Aapsimakanga nanevgam, ""Qayugham naagu?"" ‘The old man asked him, “So then, where is it?”’ (AYUM. UNGIP. III:15)"	қаюӷам
qayugheta	pos	IPA	what is he doing?; what’s going on?; oh!	"particle; qayugheta? akikughluki qaikmini, saluningam igleghlleqa? what is he doing? he sold his dogs, now how will he travel?; qayugheta, quyngighpagnitepigta! ‘oh!, how it smells like reindeer!’"	қаюӷыта
qayughllak	pos	IPA	because	"particle; meghnaaliyugtunga qayughllak meghnupigtunga ‘I want to rest because I am very tired’; neghnaquq qayughllak igataghpetuq ‘he is going to eat because, evidentally, he is hungry’; ""Aa, sakun tagistek?"" ""Qayakun tagikung. Qayughllak nunamnni seghletun kiyaghlleghhiikung, enngaatall umiilegput seghlepiguuq …. ‘“Ah, by what means did you two come?” “We came by kayak. Because in our land we lived badly, our chief was very bad ….”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 36)"	қаюҳльяк
qayughmi	pos	IPA	whatever you think; it’s up to you; how then?	particle	қаюӷми
qayughquta	pos	IPA	food to be added to other food to make the meal	"qawaagtani palaghyagulluki qayughqutkaghqameng alla qawaagyaamalghii ‘he felt he didn’t have birds he caught for a meal, so he went out and got some more’; ugkemun qayughqutkaghqaghniighaqunga ‘I am looking for food to add to our meal’"	қаӥиҳқута
qayugtugh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly strike with an adze	No information given.	қаюхтуӷ-
qayugun	pos	IPA	adze	No information given.	қаюгун
qayungllaasiq	pos	IPA	tea kettle	No information given.	қаюңлья̄сиқ
qayuq1	pos	IPA	tea; broth; hot beverage	qayungllaghnaqunga ‘I am making a hot beverage’	қаюқ1
qayuq2	pos	IPA	how	particle; qayuq elpek? ‘how are you?’; qayughmi ‘however you think; it’s up to you’	қаюқ2
qayuqaawi-	pos	IPA	to cause harm	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	қаюқāӱи-
qayuqsaaq	pos	IPA	frozen meat broth; little bit of broth	No information given.	қаюқся̄қ
qayuusiq	pos	IPA	cup	No information given.	қаю̄сиқ
qayuutaghraak	pos	IPA	washtub; trough	Chukotkan (R)	қаю̄таӷрāк
qayuutaq	pos	IPA	wooden tray for cutting meat or for eating	"cf. qayug-, qayuq1"	қаю̄тақ
Qayuutaq	pos	IPA	mountain near the end of the Kukulget Mountains near Savoonga	so called because its top resembles a tray	Қаю̄тақ
Qayuutaq	pos	IPA	lake in Chukotka between Imtuk lagoon and Sireniki	see Map 2 in Appendices	Қаю̄тақ
qayvighagh-	pos	IPA	to almost reach the top or surface	"sivuyagtem aghveq samanlluku aghvequmaa qayvighaghyan ‘the striker struck the whale while it was under water when it was about to surface’; qayvighansagulluku uyavanteghngaan naghullgumakanga ‘he felt that is was very close to the surface, so he threw the harpoon at it’"	қаӥвиӷаӷ-
qayvighqe-	pos	IPA	to suddenly reveal a secret	aghivallghiik elngaatall qayvighqutaqeftuk ‘the two people who were argueing were bursting out with each other’s secrets’; aksaqumtaaq qenwat qayvighqaat ‘they finally let out the secret’	қаӥвиҳқы-
qayvighte-	pos	IPA	to mention; to reveal	No information given.	қаӥвиҳты-
qaywa	pos	IPA	"wait!; consider before proceeding!; at least; really?; yes, okay then; is that so?"	"particle; qaywa taginaqaat? ‘are you sure they are coming?’; qaywa mekestaaghhaghngaan tuunakevnga taagken neghsameng ‘even though there isn't much you may still give me some of that seal meat’; Nanevgaghhaqlu aghnaghlqwaaghllaklu aangghumalghiik, ""Qaywa qaywa aglaghnaqukung!"" ‘The old man and the old woman assented, “Yes, okay, we’ll go!”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 37)"	қаӥӱа
qaywaam	pos	IPA	certainly; surely	"particle, can be used in praise or in sarcasm; qaywaam tuunegpenaan qinunaghtuq ‘surely you shouldn't give him any -- he's such a trouble maker’ "	қаӥӱāм
qaywaangam	pos	IPA	most certainly; that's enough	particle	қаӥӱāңам
qaywalleqa	pos	IPA	now I see!; so that's how it is!	"particle;  may convey sarcasm; qaywalleqa tamaaken pilgulghiiten akugaaq aaptaataghyamken avangituten ‘so that’s how it is, you do have that kind also, though when I asked you the other day you didn't’"	қаӥӱальықа
qazigyaghaq*	pos	IPA	yearling spotted seal (Phoca largha)	No information given.	қазигьяӷақ
qazigyaq	pos	IPA	spotted seal (Phoca largha)	Kamengllaghaqegkangit neghsapiget. Qazigyameng melqulighluku yuget ipigtuluku…. ‘They made (hunting) skin-boots from ringed seal (skin). People put spotted seal (skin) on the boot legs….’ SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:94)	қазигьяқ
qefliqe-	pos	IPA	"to be mad, angry or furious (of a man)"	"applies to men only, for women's anger see agniqe-; qefliquq ‘he is angry’ / qefliqutaa ‘he is angry at him, is expressing his anger at him’; qefliqem angtalanganeng gginaa kavighqwaaghllagumakanga naqam sameng pigpenani, enkaam ellingit tunuquusimalghiit ‘because of his terrible anger his face turned red, but since he didn't say anything they turned their backs on him’"	қыфльиқы-
qefliqsuug-	pos	IPA	to be slightly angry or frustrated (of a man)	No information given.	қыфльиқсю̄г-
qefteq	pos	IPA	Canada goose (Branta canadensis)	No information given.	қыфтық
qeghaate-	pos	IPA	to store food on a meat rack in winter	No information given.	қыӷāты-
qeghagh-	pos	IPA	to put up a meat rack or put meat on a rack	No information given.	қыӷаӷ-
qeghaghpak	pos	IPA	whale rib used as a pole	Chukotkan (R)	қыӷаҳпак
qeghaq	pos	IPA	meat rack	"used in the plural, qeghat, for one rack; Aatkaghten taakut aalluki aani, ingavek qeghat asingitnun utaqiiyaghtaa tuqlughlleqamken. ‘Go out after you put on those clothes of yours, and go over there under the meat rack to wait; I’ll call you.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:18)"	қыӷақ
qeghighin	pos	IPA	edging or welt of white leather around sole of skin-boot	Chukotkan (R)	қыӷиӷин
qeghilek	pos	IPA	jug	Chukotkan (R)	қыӷилык
qeghiq	pos	IPA	lip	Chukotkan (R)	қыӷиқ
qelaate-	pos	IPA	to take up one’s time; to be slow (or slower than hoped or expected)	"qelaannaquq amiiqaq niightughaghsaqumteggu ‘the walrus skin is going to take a while [to work on], so we should stretch it on the drying rack’; cf. qelanegh-"	қыля̄ты-
qelagh-1	pos	IPA	to urge dogs on when driving a team; to shoo dogs away	"qikmini qelaghii ‘he urged his dogs on’, or ‘he shooed his dogs away’; qikmiq neqneng neghiilghii qelaghaa ‘she shooed away the dog that was eating their food.’ cf. qelegh-"	қыляӷ-1
qelagh-2	pos	IPA	to call out a greeting to someone coming to the door	qelaamalghii iteghmeng nagaquulluni ‘he shouted out a greeting upon hearing someone coming in’; cf. qelegh-	қыляӷ-2
qelanegh-	pos	IPA	to long for; to await with impatience. 	tengegkayugneng qelaneghluni nulughyaghtuq ‘he became impatient waiting for the plane and went fishing’; Kaspik suupeliightuutkelluku sumeghtaghamalghii qelanghumaghmi apangita ungipaghaalleghqaaneng…. ‘The entire time as Kaspik ate his stew he impatiently and with longing thought about the story his grandfather would tell….’ (KALLAG. 76)	қыляныӷ-
qelanqe-	pos	IPA	to await with impatience or longing	Qelanqumakanga igaghvigraaghaghmun igaghyalleghqani. ‘He could hardly wait to go to school in that new school house.’ (SULUWET 7)	қылянқы-
qelegh-	pos	IPA	to urge; to encourage; to advise; to coax	qelghaa ‘he urged him to do something’ / qelghaa qikmit neghqesqelluki ‘he urged him to feed the dogs’; qelghutaa ‘he urged that something be done concerning it’; nanevgam qelghutii aallghit angyat unitefqiita pisqelluki anuqataghaatanganeng ‘the old man encouraged them to make sure not to leave their partners' boat on account of the windy weather’; cf. qelagh-	қылыӷ-
qelegi	pos	IPA	it turns out that; however; in the meantime	particle; Chukotkan; qelegi ellnga aqnighaqeftuq ‘it turns out that he was hurting’; may be used with expressive gemination of g	қылыги
qeleqetaagh-	pos	IPA	to tickle	qeleqetaaghaa ‘he is tickling her’ / qeleqetaaghutuk ‘they two are tickling each other’; = ighileqitaagh-	қылықытāӷ-
qelghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly urge	No information given.	қылӷӱāӷ-
qellayeg-	pos	IPA	to have surgery	No information given.	қыльяӥыг-
qellayek	pos	IPA	scar with overgrowth of tissue	No information given.	қыльяӥык
qellefkaghte-	pos	IPA	to parboil	maklagmeng qellefkaghlluku neghuusimalghiit ‘they parboiled bearded seal meat and ate it’; ilangi neqem qellefkaghlluki neghaqiit ‘they parboil other foods and eat them’	қыльыфкаҳты-
qelleghyak	pos	IPA	sound of waves in lake or of moving between layers of ice	No information given.	қыльыӷьяк
qellemghaari-	pos	IPA	to be stunted in one’s growth and development	qikmighaq neghepanghitem qenwat qellemghaariiq ‘the puppy’s growth is stunted because it didn’t eat much’; amsakelghiimeng qellemghaarikameng unangumalghii ‘he caught a small seal that was stunted in growth’	қыльымӷāри-
qellepegraq	pos	IPA	membrane of bearded seal intestine or walrus heart	No information given.	қыльыпыграқ
qellghaghqe-	pos	IPA	to influence to act in a certain way	"paqumiyulghiit angyamun ilangita kequuluteng qellghaghqiit ‘they hesitated to go boating, but the others influenced them when they went’; qellghaghqiiluteng ellngit taglaghtut ‘they influenced others to go, but they went back to land’"	қыльҳаҳқы-
qellghaghqi-	pos	IPA	to influence others to act; to stir up others to get them to act in a certain way	No information given.	қыльҳаҳқи-
qelli-	pos	IPA	to get packed down from pressure	qelliiq or qellii ‘it got packed down’ / qellisighhu nuna naghaaghvigkaaluku qellikan ‘allow time for that ground to get packed down for playground use’; qellisameng saagsaqameng akuutameng cookies-engllameng ikuutaqut ‘cookie shapes are cut out of flattened and spread-out dough’	қыльи-
qellineq	pos	IPA	site for athletic or similar physical activity; playground	there was a specific site termed thus in Gambell	қыльинық
qelliqa	pos	IPA	pack ice; floating ice field	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, qelliqek, for one such ice field"	қыльиқаы
qellisagh-	pos	IPA	to flatten	= qelliste-	қыльисяӷ-
qelliste-	pos	IPA	to flatten	= qellisagh-	қыльисты-
qellu	pos	IPA	colon	No information given.	қылью
qellughqaan	pos	IPA	rope used for gymnastics	"also qellughqaan; used in the dual, qellughqaatek, for one such rope"	қыльюҳқāн
qellughqagh-	pos	IPA	to do gymnastics on a rope stretched between posts	No information given.	қыльюҳқаӷ-
qellughte-	pos	IPA	to shrink	"qellughtuq or qellughtaa ‘it shrank’ / qellughtestaa ‘he shrank it, let it shrink’"	қыльюҳты-
qelluughwagh-	pos	IPA	to have excrement stuck to one (of a dog usually)	qikmiq tapghaghmeng neghluni qelluughwaamalghii ‘the dog ate a thong and its excrement got stuck’	қылью̄ӷӱаӷ-
qelmegh-	pos	IPA	to shimmer; to glitter; to be shiny	"qelmeghtuq ‘it is glittering, is shiny’ / qelmeqegtaq ‘glittery thing’; = evlegh-, qavlegh-, uvlegh-"	қылмыӷ-
qelmeghsagh-	pos	IPA	to polish	qelmeghsaghaa ulimaaq ‘he polished the carving’	қылмыӷсяӷ-
qelmeghte-	pos	IPA	to become shiny	qelmeghtuq or qelmeghtaa ‘it became shiny’ /	қылмыҳты-
qelmeghute-	pos	IPA	to glitter	No information given.	қылмыӷуты-
qelmeghuute-	pos	IPA	to flash; to reflect light	"tengegkayugem qergesekek siqinghem qelmeghuutaak qiivyalghiimi ‘the plane’s window reflected the sun, as it turned’"	қылмыӷӯты-
qelmeqsaq	pos	IPA	shining or flashing spot on something	No information given.	қылмықсяқ
qelpa	pos	IPA	large branch on lower part of reindeer antler	Chukotkan (R)	қыльпа
qelpate-	pos	IPA	to be open; to be unlocked	"qelpatuq ‘it is open, unlocked’ / cf. qelpeghte-"	қыльпаты-
qelpegh-	pos	IPA	to open	"qelpeghtuq ‘it opened’ / Esghapagumaluku amik inga qelpeghluni, yuuk aanumalghii. Amik qelpeghngamaluku imaninguq sangwaa naaqaaluni neqnipiglleghhii aana. ‘While he was watching it that door opened and a person went out. While the door was open something emitting a delicious aroma came out.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 2)"	қыльпыӷ-
qelpeghquusiq	pos	IPA	can opener; opener of any sort	No information given.	қыльпыҳқӯсиқ
qelpeghte-	pos	IPA	to open (it); to start (an activity)	qelpeghtaa ‘he opened it’ / cf. qelpate-	қыльпыҳты-
qelqe-	pos	IPA	to compel; to order	"Ii, qelqangit legan tesamavek. ‘Then they made them go down there.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:2); … qelqaat uyamigesqelluku Jesus-em qaquuraa. ‘… they compelled him to carry the cross of Jesus on his shoulders.’ (Matthew 27.32)"	қыльқы-
qelqela-	pos	IPA	to be difficult	No information given.	қыльқыла-
qelu-	pos	IPA	to have a muscle cramp; to be tied or fastened tightly; to be taut	ighumikun qeluuq ‘he has a cramp in his leg’; qelutaa he lashed it to something	қылю-
Qelughilghet	pos	IPA	a particular clan	singular is Qelughileq	қылюӷилӷыт
qelughtaaq	pos	IPA	long strip of floating sea ice or series of pieces of ice arrayed in a strip	see item 52 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қылюҳтāқ
qelulghute-	pos	IPA	to tie to secure it from slipping off	"awavaghaatalghii takwavek qelulghutigu ‘since it is trying to get away, tie it to secure it’"	қылулӷуты-
qeluqite-	pos	IPA	to be be restrained by a leash or tether; to stop suddenly upon reaching the end of one’s rope	"qikmim sughugyaghluku uyaatamikun qeluqituq ‘a dog chased him, but it stopped suddenly when it reached the end of its rope’"	қылуқиты-
qelutaq	pos	IPA	fastener line	"amik qelpeghaghhnayukan uninnaqngamigu qelutaa qillghusimakanga ‘in case the door might suddenly open, he secured it by tying it in place’; umeketaaq nefteggluku qelutii qilleghqughii nengtaqluki ‘he put the cover in place, and tied its fasteners stretching them tight’"	қылутақ
qelute-	pos	IPA	"to tie, bind or otherwise fasten tightly"	qelutaa ‘he fastened it to something’ /	қылюты-
qemak	pos	IPA	almost the same size; approximately	particle; qemak akmagutaghpagestun angtaaq ‘it is almost as big as a large barrel’	қымак
qemall	pos	IPA	could be or must be; might happen; finally; at last	"particle; qemall angufqaghlleqaaten ‘you might get caught in the bad weather’; utaqiigaqut qemall taawa aliighaa ‘they waited so long and at last it cleared up’; waaknanighaqanka iiskughtekanka qemall kaatut ‘just when I forgot about looking out for them, they finally came’; qalingunang pikuvek eslallugughtekan qemall aghilleqaaten ‘if you go without your raincoat you might get wet if it rains’; Ii aghnalqwaaq qemall, tukaasimaa neghegkaan entaqun, mighyam kaatkaqaa elngaatall, tesqawani taaqluni tuufqaghtaneghmeng.  ‘See, it must be that what she ate made the old lady sick because an attack of vomiting came over her after she ate so quickly.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:6)"	қымаль
qemalngam	pos	IPA	consequently	particle	қымалңам
qemeghyaq	pos	IPA	eyelash	No information given.	қымыӷьяқ
qemi	pos	IPA	tune; melody	Chukotkan (R)	қыми
qemighlluk	pos	IPA	torso	panika qemighllugtuuq ‘my daughter has a long torso’	қымиҳльюк
Qemighpak	pos	IPA	hill with VABM “Rock” on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Қымиҳпак
qemighqe-1	pos	IPA	to split a frozen fish lengthwise	Chukotkan (R); cf. qemite-	қымиҳқы-1
qemighqe-2	pos	IPA	to stretch a rope tight and tie it securely	tevram qikmini qemighqelluki atghaghtuq ‘the hunter stretched and tied the towline of his dogteam and went towards the ocean’; cf. qemite-	қымиҳқы-2
qemightu-	pos	IPA	to be long	qemightuqaq ‘long thing’; qemightuluku angyinaqniiquq qayughllagnguq angyaat qemighqestaaghhaq ‘he says he will make his boat long because their boat is not long enough’; qemightuqaq taana aghveghniighmun atuqaat ‘they used that long one for whale hunting’; cf. qemiq	қымиҳту-
qemiq	pos	IPA	hill with a long profile; elongated mound; leadline or floatline of net; part of back around spinal column	No information given.	қымиқ
"qemite-, qemiite-"	pos	IPA	"to hang by the neck; to strangle; to get choked up with sadness, fear, or grief"	qemituq ‘he hung himself; qemitaa he hung it (by the neck)’ / qemitutkaqa ilungighteqelghii panigminun tuqulghiimun ‘I feel all choked up about her grief over her daughter's death’	"қымиты-, қымӣты-"
qemleghaghte-	pos	IPA	to have slight spinning of one’s head; to have a darkening in one’s eyes	No information given.	қымлыӷаҳты-
qemqagh-	pos	IPA	to ask someone to do something with someone	"qawaagyalgutnguluku ilani qemqaamakanga ‘he asked his friend to go as his partner in bird hunting’; qemqaghwaaghumayaqanga piyunghisimalghii ‘he repeatedly asked him, but he refused’"	қымқаӷ-
qemtaaghrak	pos	IPA	rudder deckhouse; rudder place	Chukotkan (R)	қымтāӷак
qemtaq	pos	IPA	"attic; upper level, floor, or story of building"	qemtamun mayuuqughaat saghllaaq ‘they took all the junk up to the attic’; qemtametuq qavaghvika ‘my bedroom is upstairs’	қымтақ
qemtigh-	pos	IPA	to install a ceiling	No information given.	қымтиӷ-
Qenaaghaak	pos	IPA	Kunaghak Creek on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Қынāӷāк
qenaaghlluk	pos	IPA	area covered by pebbles	qenaaghlluk piyukaaluni meghnughnaghtuq ‘walking in pebbly areas is tiresome’; iwernga nunivagmeng qenaaghlluk pinilghii ‘however the pebbly ground is better than the tundra’	қынāҳльук
qenaaghquute-	pos	IPA	to make the rustling sound of walking on gravel or sand	Chukotkan (R)	қынāҳқӯты-
qenaaq	pos	IPA	grainy sand; gravel	No information given.	қынāқ
qenaavzeghaq	pos	IPA	fine sand	No information given.	қынāвзыӷақ
qeneghte-	pos	IPA	to feel and say that one has been slighted	qeneghtuq ‘he feels slighted’ / qenghutkaa or qeneghtutkaa ‘he feels slighted over it’	қыныҳты-
qengaghsuki-	pos	IPA	to snort (of animals)	qengaghsukiiq ‘it snorted’ /	қыңаҳсюки-
qengaghuk	pos	IPA	snowdrift	literally: 'big nose'	қыңаӷук
qengalegtaq	pos	IPA	large bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus) of some sort	#NAME?	қыңалыхтақ
qengalek1	pos	IPA	king eider (Somateria spectabilis)	No information given.	қыңалык1
qengalek2	pos	IPA	large bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus) of some sort	#NAME?	қыңалык2
qengallegtaq	pos	IPA	northern elephant seal (Mirounga angustirostris)	not normally found in the Yupik area	қыңальыхтақ
qengaq	pos	IPA	nose	used in the dual for one person’s or animal’s nose: qengakek ‘his or its nose’	қыңақ
qengaqegtagh-	pos	IPA	to have a good sense of smell	Chukotkan (R)	қыңақыхтаӷ-
qengesquq	pos	IPA	limpet	No information given.	қыңысқуқ
qenghaghtu	pos	IPA	blue fox (Vulpes fulva var.)	No information given.	қынӷаҳту
qenghuk	pos	IPA	refrozen crushed sea ice	see item 53 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қынӷук
Qenipagilghat	pos	IPA	Kinipaghulghat Mtns. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Қынипагилӷат
qenleghwaaq	pos	IPA	long string of beads worn by women looped from shoulder to waist crossing in the front 	No information given.	қынлыӷӱāқ
qenneghhaliigh-	pos	IPA	to travel low in water (of a boat)	angyaghut qenneghhaliighluteng taglaghaqut ‘the boats are coming low in water’	қыньыҳалӣӷ-
qenneqegsagh-	pos	IPA	"to embrace, hug, or squeeze firmly; to make a hard fist"	qenneqegsaghaa ‘he squeezed her hard’; qenneqegsaghii iiggeni ‘he made a hard fist’; qenneqegsaataa ‘he made a hard fist at her’	қыньықыхсяӷ-
qenngu	pos	IPA	brow area	No information given.	қынңу
qenngulliqe-	pos	IPA	to frown; to squint	qenngulliqutaanga ugumiyagullunga ‘he frowned angrily at me’; siqinghem qenngulliqestaanga ‘the sun made me squint’	қынңульиқы-
qenngumsak	pos	IPA	small hill on top of a larger hill	Qagupalgem qenngumsagani aruughtuq ‘he looked around on top of the small hill that is on top of Qagupalek’; neqesghii qenngumsagmelnguut ayghiisimakangi ‘they (foxes) became accustomed to bait that was on a small hill atop a larger hill’	қынңумсак
qenu1	pos	IPA	thin layer of fine brash  ice that forms at the beginning of winter; newly forming slush ice	see item 54 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қыну1
qenu2	pos	IPA	girth; thickness of a more or less cylindrical thing	No information given.	қыну2
qenughhaghaq	pos	IPA	early loose slush ice	see item 56 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қынуҳаӷақ
qenulek	pos	IPA	type of codfish	Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined; = kenulek2	қынулык
qenungiitaq	pos	IPA	scoop for removing brash ice	No information given.	қынуңӣтақ
qenutu-	pos	IPA	to be thick	qenutuuq ‘it is thick’ /	қынуту-
qenwaaq	pos	IPA	“master of the mountain winds”	Chukotkan (R)	қынӱāқ
qenwat	pos	IPA	finally; as an understandable result of what has come before; pretty soon; then	"particle; qenwat naangutaaten utaqiinginaamaluta ‘finally after waiting they are leaving nothing for you’; qenwatlu pikenguten tamaaken ‘you finally got one of them too’; iniighet qenwat aghii ikughtestegpenateng ‘the clothes on the line are getting wet since they haven't been taken down’; Muluteghllagluku aaptaqsaqanga aghnangnaqunnaluku. Ighsaaqelghii, avelghaqiinaghaqegkanga. Qenwat atanga sumeghtaghaghllagluninguq aghtughluku nulightiisqenneghmeng, pimakanga, “Sameng nulightughnaluten pizin?” ‘For a long time, he had been asking him to get a woman for him to marry. He would resent it, leaving him alone. Finally his father thought very hard after having a hard time trying to get him to get married, he said to him, “What do you think you will marry?”’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:21); Tawani aqfaquullghiit nulaghllaneghmeggni sukaaghsimaghmeng lliighaqut.  Paghyulghii tunuvaamaghmi, qenwat qafsin’ggaaghtaqut. ‘Those running, when they become so many, they go faster. Those who wear out back down, then they become very few.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:48)"	қынӱат
qepe-	pos	IPA	to tie around; to strap as with tape	"for example, to tie a cord around a bag to close its opening; qepaa ‘he tied it’ / Kalngagam ukimallgha qepluku imighaqa. ‘After I tied up the hole in the bag I filled it.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 141)"	қыпы-
qeperghuugh-	pos	IPA	to decorate front of sealskin water boots with narrow strips of bleached sealskin with waterproof seams	= quperghuugh-	қыпырӷӯӷ-
qepesegaq	pos	IPA	small package tied securely	No information given.	қыпысыгақ
qepghagh-	pos	IPA	to work	"qepghaghtuq ‘he worked’; qepghaghaa ‘he worked on it’ / Mangteghat aliighluki kaatii, kaalluni mangteghamun qineghsalghiimi aghnaq qama qepghaghaqeftuq nateghmi. ‘The houses appeared, and she went to them, and when she got there and looked into a house there was a woman working in the outer room.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:206)"	қыпҳаӷ-
qepghaqaq	pos	IPA	work; job; employment	No information given.	қыпҳақақ
qepghaqiisak	pos	IPA	unemployment	No information given.	қыпҳақӣсяк
qepghaqiisek	pos	IPA	idle or bored person	No information given.	қыпҳақӣсык
qepneq1	pos	IPA	bundle; standard amount of items such as furs used in trade	No information given.	қыпньық1
qepneq2	pos	IPA	herring	Chotkotkan (R); question; maybe should be qupneq ‘whitefish’ 	қыпньық2
Qepsukak	pos	IPA	narrows in Koozata River on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Қыпсюкак
qepsukaq	pos	IPA	point of land which defines a strait or narrows together with a point on the opposite shore	No information given.	қыпсюкақ
qeputaq	pos	IPA	string; cord; rope	No information given.	қыпутақ
qepute-	pos	IPA	to tie up or tie together; to lash	qeputaa eslegelghii tapghaq ‘he tied a stout rope around something’	қыпуты-
qera	pos	IPA	aged whale skin (mangtak)	Chukotkan (R)	қыра
qerenga	pos	IPA	large old reindeer (in folktales)	cf. quyngiq	қырыңа
qergesae	pos	IPA	window	"also dual, qergesek, for one window;  qergesngi or qergesengi ‘its windows’; = qirgesa"	қыргысяы
qergu	pos	IPA	dwarf Siberian pine (Pinus cembra)	Chukotkan; = qurgu	қыргу
qerng-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > qerngagh-, qerngayaak, qerngughte-. qernguqu"	қырң-
qerngagh-	pos	IPA	together	"used in the quantifier/qualifier construction; qerngaghmeng ‘they together’; qerngamta ‘we, or us, together’"	қырңаӷ-
qerngayaak	pos	IPA	field of broken sea ice pieces bunched together	see item 55 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қырңая̄к
qerngughqugh-	pos	IPA	to gather things by repeated actions	qerngughqughii yuni ‘he gathered his crew together’; qerngughquutiiq tukfightuusaghqameng ‘he gathered some valuables to make a payment to his future inlaws (a traditional practice of a husband-to-be)’	қырңуҳқуӷ-
qerngughte-	pos	IPA	to gather; to assemble; to collect	qerngughtut ‘they gathered’; qerngughpagtaatut nagaquulluteng mengwaaghmeng taagegken ‘they quickly gathered in groups when they heard a noise that sounded sort of human in the distance’	қырңуҳты-
qernguqu	pos	IPA	birds flying together	"plural, qernguqut, used; sukilpaat qernguqut aagyata guusaqminiki ifkaghqughtaagii ‘he shot at a flock of auklets as they were flying by and caught quite a few of them’"	қырңуқу
qerrute-	pos	IPA	to gather at a certain place; to mat or tangle (of hair or fur)	angyat sikum taan’ga qerrutii ‘the ice is gathering around the boat out there’; nuyaa iglagutem qerruteghllagumalghii ‘her hair was all at one spot because it was tangled’; cf. qerng-	қышуты-
qerta	pos	IPA	matted tangled hair or fur	qertangi mesuunii ‘she combed out his tangled clusters of hair’; = qarta; cf. qalta	қышта
qertaaghneq	pos	IPA	"large group of things, people or animals"	"plural, qertaaghneghet, used; uupat qertaaghneghet qaakumakangi ‘he pulled up a large group of sea-peaches’; cf. qerng-"	қыштāӷнық
qerte-	pos	IPA	to mat or tangle (of hair or fur)	qikmim melqwa qertaa ‘the dog’s fur is getting matted’	қышты-
qesemna	pos	IPA	whetstone; rock used as whetstone; sharpening stone	Chukotkan (R); = qisemna	қысымна
qesigh-1	pos	IPA	to spit	qesightuq ‘he spit’; qesighaa ‘he spit at him’ /	қысиӷ-1
qesigh-2	pos	IPA	to sweat; to perspire; to collect condensation	qesightuq ‘he sweated’/	қысиӷ-2
qesighneq	pos	IPA	condensation; perspiration	sangigtaa suflugragem qesighnegha ‘she wiped the condensation from the pipes’	қысиӷнық
qesiighaq	pos	IPA	drizzle	qesiighaq seghleghllaguuq taawa ‘it’s drizzling so hard!’; qesiighaaghtuq ‘it began to drizzle’	қысӣӷақ
qesiighavleghaq	pos	IPA	mist	No information given.	қысӣӷавлыӷақ
qesiite-	pos	IPA	to spit out liquid; to spit blood	"qesiituq ‘he spit out something’, ‘he spit blood’; qesiitaa ‘he spit it out’ /"	қысӣты-
qesilleq	pos	IPA	spittle	No information given.	қысильық
"qesiqun, qesikqun"	pos	IPA	on the contrary; but	"particle; qesikqun pininghilnguq ‘but, he isn't well’; utaqaaqaqa qesikqun aghulaqumalghii ‘I've been waiting for him, but all this time he’d already left’; Apayepayiighenkuk melngunkuk uzivumakangat naayghaq. Qesiqun paallghunkuk qetngalleghyankuk uyghalqusighhaq uzivumakangat. ‘The spider and the beetle went around the mountain. It turned out however that  the white bug and the grasshopper went around a boulder. (They were supposed to be racing on the same course.)’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 56)"	"қысиқун, қысикқун"
qesni	pos	IPA	female walrus breast with meat to be eaten	No information given.	қысньи
qesqesawi-	pos	IPA	to stay forever; to stop resisting; to surrender	No information given.	қысқысаӱи-
qesug-1	pos	IPA	to pull up and out; to yank out	qesugii veget ‘he pulled out the grass’; qesugnaqutkesaghaa qiipam iquga ‘she tried to pull off the end of the thread that was hanging out’	қысюг-1
qesug-2	pos	IPA	happy; excited; enjoying	emotional root; qesugnaghtuq ‘it makes one happy and excited; it is enjoyable’; ayumiq qesugnaghyalghii angyaghpinneq ‘in times past it used to be very exciting when the ships came’; qesugyugtuq ‘he's happy and excited’	қысюг-2
qesuga-	pos	IPA	to have cramps from intestinal gas	aqsaka qesugaghllaguuq ‘I am having stomach cramps’	қысуга-
qesugniqe-	pos	IPA	to be very excited; to be elated; to anticipate enjoyment	Qavaghninghitunga qesugniqem Ungaziq esghaghnaqegkegka. ‘I wasn’t sleepy on account of my anticipating the pleasure of seeing Chaplino.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:186)	қысюгниқы-
qesugragh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly or continually pull out	No information given.	қысюграӷ-
qesugugh-	pos	IPA	to forcefully pull out repeatedly	aakani qesugughaa ‘she kept pulling her older sister[‘s hair]’	қысюгуӷ-
qesuqite-	pos	IPA	to choke on liquids; to swallow the wrong way	No information given.	қысюқиты-
qete-	pos	IPA	"to embrace; to hug; to put one’s arm around (it, him); to grasp"	qetaa ‘he hugged him’ / qetutuk ‘they2 embraced each other’; iiggenka qetii ‘he grasped my hands’	қыты-
qetegh-	pos	IPA	bending backwards	postural root; qeteghtuq ‘he bent backwards’	қытыӷ-
qeteghruk1	pos	IPA	upper part of spinal area	No information given.	қытыӷрук1
qeteghruk2	pos	IPA	"swim bladder of fish, dried and used to store fish eggs"	No information given.	қытыӷрук2
qeteq	pos	IPA	spinal area of a person; back of person	qetgha aqnightaa aleghmi ‘he injured his partner's back’	қытық
qetgaasiq	pos	IPA	jump-rope	No information given.	қытхāсиқ
qetgagh-	pos	IPA	to jump up and down; to jump rope	No information given.	қытхаӷ-
qetgaghta	pos	IPA	playful bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus) pup that jumps out of the water	No information given.	қытхаҳта
qetgamlla-	pos	IPA	to jump with low short jumps as in dancing or when having a tantrum	No information given.	қытхамлья-
qetgegh-1	pos	IPA	to jump; to catch up with; to attack	qetgeghtuq ‘he or it jumped’; qetgeghaa ‘he jumped over it’ / qetgeghtuq uyghagllagem qaaynganeng ‘he jumped down from the top of the big rock’	қытхыӷ-1
qetgegh-2	pos	IPA	"to rush over to a person at a distance, to greet him, render aid, or investigate"	No information given.	қытхыӷ-2
qetgegh-3	pos	IPA	to endeavor to consummate one's marriage after bride service to inlaws and now come to their house to claim one's bride	this was the traditional way of getting married with the couple then moving in with the wife's family; elements of this tradition are still practiced	қытхыӷ-3
qetgeghtugh-	pos	IPA	to rely on for moral support	qetgeghtughaa ‘he relies on him’ /	қытхыҳтуӷ-
qetgeghyaq	pos	IPA	water strider insect	"Llaaghanwha paallghunkut, qetgeghyaankut, apayepayiighenkut, melnguunkut qerngughusimalghiit nguuyngaaghaam mangteghaan saaghwanun. ‘And so the mites, the water striders, the spiders, and the beetles gathered by the side of the housefly’s house.’ (SULUWET 32)"	қыьхыӷьяқ
qetngigh-	pos	IPA	to be bright and dazzling (light)	qetngightuq ‘it is bright and dazzling’ /	қытңиӷ-
qetngiqe-	pos	IPA	to be dazzled by bright light	qetngiqaa ‘he is dazzled by it’ /	қытңиқы-
qetu-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > qetulliighagh-, qetumla, qetusqaaq, qetustaaghhaq"	қыту-
qetulliighagh-	pos	IPA	to soften; to become soft	No information given.	қытульӣӷаӷ-
qetumla	pos	IPA	soft dirt or soft snow that one sinks into as he walks	No information given.	қытумля
qetusqaaq	pos	IPA	soft thing	qetusqaaghet unaghsit ulimanqegtut ‘soft wood is easy to work with’; = qetusqwaaq	қытусқāқ
qetusqwaaq	pos	IPA	soft thing	#NAME?	қытусқӱāқ
qetustaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	soft thing	qetustaaghhaaguq ‘it is soft’; qetustaaghhaq nuna tuutegpenaan ‘don't step in the soft dirt’	қытустāҳақ
qetuuqe-	pos	IPA	to take a long time getting ready	"angyaghnaqelghiit unaaghhaaneng qetuuqegkat qenwat whanikwaa ‘the boating crew was taking long getting ready since this morning, and then it became evening time’"	қытӯқы-
qevute-	pos	IPA	to beat up (a person)	"Whavemun kenlanga neqangisagaqukut, meghyaaghqiisagaqukut, aatkiisagaqukut. Yuget qevutaqiinkut. Nengitukut, igleghtaagukut quunpeng. ‘To the present time we’ve suffered shortage of food, drink, and clothing. People beat us. We are homeless, and always on the move.’ (1 Corinthians 4.11)"	қывуты-
qevuute-	pos	IPA	to use one's might to the greatest degree possible; to do one's best; to speak loud; to act to the maximum amount one can	qevuulluten liinnaqi ‘try as hard as you can to learn’; qevuulluni akuziiq ‘he spoke out loudly and forcefully’; anuqlighaa elngaatall qevuulluku ‘the wind really blew hard’; qevuutepiglluku sayuggu ‘pull it as hard as you can’; Elngaatall qevuulluni pugimnaqutkesalghiimi qenwat alquutaghpagem puunga kaasimakanga. ‘Trying to swim as hard as he could he finally got to the handle of the spoon.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG.  12)	қывӯты-
qezilek	pos	IPA	jug; pitcher	Chukotkan (V&E)	қызилык
qeziq	pos	IPA	lip (of person or container)	"specifically the lower lip; Legan ugingan tawavek, qezini amqeghtaghlluku, siingyaqminigu legan aga navaghmi ulleghtuq, qeteghaghtuq. ‘Right then and there her husband bit his lower lip and pushed his wife, so she fell backwards and landedon the flat of her back.’ (KALLAG. 64)"	қызиқ
qigeghtekaq	pos	IPA	fired clay; fired clay lamp	cf. qiku	қигыҳтыкақ
qighrughagh-	pos	IPA	to secure an entrance with ropes	No information given.	қиӷруӷаӷ-
qighuneq	pos	IPA	young murre (Uria spp.) which is too fat to fly	No information given.	қиӷунық
Qigi	pos	IPA	former village at Cape Kygynin at eastern end of Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	қиги
qigiiqa	pos	IPA	hook made of ivory that is attached to the end of a rope (used for strapping things)	yugem tapghii qamaglluteng qigiiqalguftut ‘all the man’s ropes had ivory hooks on them’	қикӣқа
qigugh-	pos	IPA	to cut hair short; to shear; to mow; to get a short haircut	"refers to a male’s haircut; qigughtuq ‘he got or gave a short haircut’; qigughaa ‘he sheared it, gave him a short haircut’ / qigughsightuq ‘he had his hair cut short’"	қигуӷ-
qigughaaq	pos	IPA	meadow; grassy area; lawn	Chukotkan (R)	қигуӷāқ
qigughruk	pos	IPA	"smoke; smog; smell of a campfire, barbecue, etc."	No information given.	қигуӷрук
qigughta	pos	IPA	barber	No information given.	қигуҳта
qigughvik	pos	IPA	barber shop	No information given.	қигуӷвик
qiguk	pos	IPA	reflection of open water shown by dark sky; water sky	No information given.	қигук
qiguusiq	pos	IPA	hair clippers	"used in the dual, qiguusik, for one pair of clippers"	қигӯсиқ
qiifte-	pos	IPA	to turn (it); to change plans	qiiftuq ‘he changed plans’; qiiftaa ‘he turned it’ / angyallightem qiiftaa angyaq siku negughnaluku ‘the captain turned the boat in another direction to avoid the ice’; agghilluteng qiifsimiit allanun council-et ‘the council has changed its plans or turned its attention elsewehere’	қӣфты-
qiigh-1	pos	IPA	to stoke a fire or stove; to put wood in stove	qiighaa ‘he stoked it’ / qiighiiq ‘he stoked something’	қӣӷ-1
qiigh-2	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > qiighnagh-, qiighnite-"	қӣӷ-2
qiighista	pos	IPA	stroker; boilerman	No information given.	қӣӷиста
qiighnagh-	pos	IPA	to be slippery; to be slick; to slide well	qiighnaghtuq ‘it is slippery’ or ‘it slides well’ /	қӣӷнаӷ-
qiighnaq	pos	IPA	something slippery	No information given.	қӣӷнақ
qiighnirkitagh-	pos	IPA	to purposely slide (as on the ice) on one's feet as one walks	No information given.	қӣӷнишкитаӷ-
qiighnite-	pos	IPA	to slip (on ice or other slippery surface)	Qiighnitaghamikun eflugakun pangalgumalghii inglunganun agavek llivelghagnun iingkugnun. ‘By his slipping across the floor he (the mouse) ran to the other side to that shelf over there.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 8)	қӣӷниты-
qiighqaq	pos	IPA	island	"Qiighqaq esghaqaaluni llangaqa qetkaq inglupigaghmeng iiggmeng, enkaam aatqaa Sivuqaq, Ulimaghistem sivuqaa. ‘The island (St. Lawrence Is.) looks like something that has been squeezed with one hand, and hence it has the name “Sivuqaq”, the one the Creator wrung out.’ (KALLAG. 8)"	қӣҳқақ
Qiighqaq	pos	IPA	middlemost of the Punuk Islands off the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Қӣҳқақ
qiighw-	pos	IPA	to cough; to get a cold	"qiighwtuq ‘he coughed’, ‘he caught a cold’; qiighwtaa ‘he caught a cold’; qiighwutaa qiighwlluk ‘he coughed up thick phlegm’"	қӣӷӱ-
qiighwlluk	pos	IPA	thick phlegm	No information given.	қӣӱҳльюк
qiighwte-	pos	IPA	to get grey hairs	qiighwtaquq ‘he's getting grey hairs’; aghyuqat qiighwtaqii ‘old people become grey’	қӣӷӱты-
qiighwutkaq	pos	IPA	tubercular person	No information given.	қӣӷӱуткақ
qiigniigh-	pos	IPA	to look for firewood	No information given.	қӣгнӣӷ-
qiiksug-	pos	IPA	to be self-conscious; to feel uneasy due to being watched; to feel bashful	"qiiksugtuq ‘he feels self-conscious, bashful’ / qiiksugtestaa ‘he made him feel self-conscious by watching him’"	қӣксюг-
qiiksuke-	pos	IPA	"to be self-conscious, feel bashful or overpowered because of being watched by (him)"	"qiiksukaa ‘he is self-conscious, feels bashful or overpowered because she is watching him’ /"	қӣксюкы-
qiilngumighte-	pos	IPA	to convince	"aygughiksaghluki qenwat qillngumighsimakangat ‘he didn’t believe them at first but they finally convinced him’; qiilngumighsatni taawa maligusimalghii ‘when he was convinced, he followed’; qiilngumighnaqutkiteggu kayutnguluku ‘try to convince him so he can be of assistance’"	қӣлңумиҳты-
qiinghigh-	pos	IPA	to get fully acquainted; to understand; to get to know; to get familiar with	esghaqusightem qenwat qiinghighwaaghaa ‘he sees him all the time so he really got to know him’	қӣнӷиӷ-
qiinghute-	pos	IPA	to aim at	"qiinghutaa ‘he aimed at it’ / qiinghutillguuq ‘he is good at aiming, is a good shot’"	қӣнӷуты-
qiinghutisiq	pos	IPA	back-sight on gun	Chukotkan (R)	қӣнӷутисиқ
qiingu	pos	IPA	long reindeer hair from under the chin	used in a kind of needlepoint; = qiiyngu	қӣңу
qiipaghaghpak	pos	IPA	tarpaulin	No information given.	қӣпаӷаӷпак
qiipaghaq*	pos	IPA	cloth; fabric; lightweight over-parka; snowshirt	"used in the dual, qiipaghaak, for a lightweight over-parka"	қӣпаӷақӮ
qiipaq	pos	IPA	strand of  thread; spool of thread	"used in the plural, qiipat, for thread, spool of thread, or strands of sinew thread"	қӣпақ
qiipe-	pos	IPA	to twist; to turn (a knob or the like)	"qiipuq ‘it got twisted’; qiipaa ‘he twisted it, turned it (as when turning a knob’ / qiipluku qelpeghtaa ‘he opened it by twisting it’; qiiputaak ‘he twisted them2 together’; qiiputaa tapghaq napaqakun ‘he wrapped the rope around the pole’"	қӣпы-
qiipi-	pos	IPA	to make hand-made thread	done by twisting shredded sinew or other fiber in a special way	қӣпи-
qiipraghun	pos	IPA	chain	"used in the plural, qiipraghutet, for one chain; Qiipraghutenglunga qikmiput petugteghanka. ‘I bought chains and tied up our dogs.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 130)"	қӣпшаӷун
qiipraq	pos	IPA	fat on intestine of walrus	cf. qiipe-	қӣпшақ
qiiptaasiq	pos	IPA	pole used for gathering kelp	No information given.	қӣптāсиқ
qiiptagh-	pos	IPA	"to gather kelp by twisting it, under the water, onto a special pole"	Ukisamigu qiiptaasini ateghlluku qiiptaamalghii elqwaaghmeng.  ‘When he made a hole in it [the ice] he lowered his kelp-gathering tool and by twisting it gathered some kelp.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20)	қӣптаӷ-
qiiptaq	pos	IPA	kelp that is gathered by being wound on a special pole	No information given.	қӣптақ
qiipuumaraghuq	pos	IPA	curly-haired person	Chukotkan (R)	қӣпӯмараӷуқ
qiiqruq	pos	IPA	thing that is frozen fast to the ground	yuuk mallungumalghii qiiqruuteghllakameng aghveghmeng ‘a man found a whale carcass that was frozen to the ground’	қиқшуқ
qiiqw1	pos	IPA	grey hair	No information given.	қӣӱқ1
qiiqw2	pos	IPA	cough; cold (respiratory illness)	No information given.	қӣӱқ2
qiivaqu-	pos	IPA	to turn one’s head side to side and look around	"anipa nalugluni qiivaquluni tenguq ‘an owl landed, turned its head side to side, and then flew away’"	қӣвақу-
qiive-	pos	IPA	to turn body or head; to make a turn while traveling; to turn toward someone for help	qiivuq ‘he turned’; qiivaa ‘he turned toward her or it’ / qiivuq ukavek aqumtaaghngaaghmi ‘he turned this way as he sat’; angyaghpaget taanegkut qiivut ukavek taakwa ‘that ship out there is turning this way and coming’; aghnam qiiviinkut ugingiilluni ‘the woman has turned to us for moral support since she lost her husband’	қӣвы-
qiivyaghaq	pos	IPA	bend in the trail	No information given.	қӣвьяӷақ
qiiyngu	pos	IPA	long reindeer hair from under the chin	"used in a kind of needlepoint; = qiingu; Angyalgem nulighhan, qilleghtengnguut taakut, taqughtekun, qiiyngut amenqun quyngim manungi melqughtuqat. ‘The captain’s wife would take a tuft of reindeer chin hair and tie it onto her braid.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:218)"	қӣӥңу
qiiyngu-	pos	IPA	to decorate with a kind of needlepoint done with long reindeer hair from under the chin	No information given.	қӣӥңу-
Qikeghtapaget	pos	IPA	islands in western part of Koozata Lagoon (Naayvaghllak) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Қикыҳтапагыт
qikeghte-	pos	IPA	to bend	"sivutmun qikightaghaquyeng piniighleqii ‘if they are bent further forward, they’ll be better’"	қикыҳты-
qikighneq	pos	IPA	bent part; curve	qamiyemi ighunii qikighneghtughtepagumakangi ‘he bent the parts that holds the sled-bed to the runners of his sled too much’; tiintam neghqwaaghtaan qikighneghi pinightut ‘the degree to which the tent frame members are bent is good’	қикиӷнық
qikighqe-	pos	IPA	to become bent; to become crooked	No information given.	қикиҳқы-
qikighqugh-	pos	IPA	to set (a saw blade or the like)	quugmun kepuusim savigtii qikighneghiisata qikighquumi ‘the teeth of the saw that is used to cut logs were not set so he set them’; qikighquqani pilagtuusim savigtii qikighneghqelliighaamakangi ‘he did not set the teeth of the saw enough’	қикиҳқуӷ-
qikmighaq	pos	IPA	puppy	No information given.	қикмьиӷақ
qikmighwaaq	pos	IPA	bone in upper arm; ulna; figurine of any animal worn as a charm	No information given.	қикмьиӷӱāқ
qikmiiraaq	pos	IPA	dried dog-skin fomerly used for parka trim	No information given.	қикмьӣрāқ
qikmiq	pos	IPA	dog	No information given.	қикмиқ
qikngughaqaq	pos	IPA	glover’s (three-cornered) needle	No information given.	қикңьуӷақақ
qiku	pos	IPA	clay	formerly used for making seal-oil lamps; cf. qigeghtekaq	қику
qilag-	pos	IPA	to make a net	qilagtuq ‘he made a net’; qilagaa ‘he made it (a net)’ /	қиляг-
qilaga	pos	IPA	sky	qilaga aliighaa ‘the sky is clearing’	қиляга
qilaget	pos	IPA	patterning of tattoos on the cheek	Chukotkan (R); this is a plural; cf. qilak	қилягыт
qilagigh-	pos	IPA	to become overcast; to become cloudy	No information given.	қилягиӷ-
qilaglluuk	pos	IPA	dark storm cloud	No information given.	қиляхлью̄к
qilak	pos	IPA	heavens	No information given.	қиляк
qilawaaq	pos	IPA	cloud	No information given.	қиляӱāқ
qilegi	pos	IPA	fat on reindeer intestine	cf. qilu	қилыги
qilevri1	pos	IPA	"thin, knotted, bent stem of the Lapland Cassiope plant (Cassiope tetragona) used as tinder or fuel (in the wilderness)"	cf. qilu	қилыври1
qilevri2	pos	IPA	fat on outside of reindeer intestines	cf. qilu	қилыври2
qilgha-	pos	IPA	to complain; to be annoyed; to be irritated; to be critical	qilghaaq ‘he complained’ /	қилӷа-
qilghake-	pos	IPA	to be annoyed or irritated over (it); to criticize	qilghakaa ‘he is annoyed over it’ /	қилӷакы-
qilghayagute-	pos	IPA	to become irritable	No information given.	қилӷаягуты-
qilghayug-	pos	IPA	to be irritable	No information given.	қилӷаюг-
"qiliigh-, qiliighyug-"	pos	IPA	to covet something; to desire something	"qiliigh- is esentially an ‘emotional root’ (see qiliiqe-/qiliiyuke-, qiliighnagh- and qiliighnaq), but it can be used as is in place of qiliighyug-; qiliightuq or qiliighyugtuq ‘he desires something’ / mekelghiighhaq elngaatall qiliightuq naghaaghutmeng ‘the little boy really wished to have the toys’"	"қилӣӷ-, қилӣӷюг-"
qiliighnagh-	pos	IPA	to be desirable	No information given.	қилӣӷнаӷ-
qiliighnaq	pos	IPA	desirable thing	No information given.	қилӣӷнақ
"qiliiqe-, qiliighyuke-"	pos	IPA	to covet (it); to desire (it)	"qiliiqaa or qiliighyukaa ‘he desires it’ / uvilighneghpesi salqumsingi qiliighyukegpenaki ‘whatever it is that your neighbor has, don't covet them’"	"қилӣқы-, қилӣӷюкы-"
qilleghneq	pos	IPA	knot	No information given.	қильыӷнық
qilleghtaq	pos	IPA	sheaf of grass	No information given.	қильыҳтақ
qilleghte-	pos	IPA	to tie	qilleghtaa ‘he tied it’ / qillghutaa ‘he tied it to something’; qilleghtengngwaaghaa ‘he tied it securely’	қильыҳты-
qilleghtuqaq1	pos	IPA	sheath for harpoon point	cf. qilleghte-	қильыҳтуқақ1
qilleghtuqaq2	pos	IPA	knot at tend of rope to keep it from unraveling or slipping off  something	satemnayukan tapghaq uyguskuvgu qilleghtuqighnaken ‘put a knot on the rope to keep from slipping off when you tie it as an extention to the other rope’	қильыҳтуқақ2
qilleghvikuusaq	pos	IPA	string with beads tied formerly onto new or special objects	No information given.	қильыӷвикӯсақ
qillghutaq	pos	IPA	"tie rope, cord or string"	No information given.	қильҳутақ
qilu	pos	IPA	intestine; coiled spring (e.g. bedspring)	cf. qilegi	қилю
qilug-	pos	IPA	to bark (of dog)	qilugtuq ‘it barked’; qilugaa ‘it barked at him’ / qilugutut ‘they barked at each other’; qilugpaghquuq ‘it barked loudly’	қилюг-
qilughru	pos	IPA	the number eight (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"cf. qilu; the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	қилюӷру
qilughwaaq	pos	IPA	outcropping of rock	"Naayghami qilughwaaghet ataasit aatghi Tenguglluget ‘at the Gambell mountain, there is one pile of rocks called Tenguglluget’; qilughwaaghnun mayughluni aruughtuq ‘he climbed on the the pile of rocks and looked around’"	қилуӷӱāқ
qimag-	pos	IPA	to flee; to run away	qimagtuq ‘he or it fled’; qimagaa ‘he fled from it; it fled from him’ /	қимаг-
qimagraa-	pos	IPA	to be on the run	yimitiqem mekelghiiq ilamineng qimagraaluni ayuqeftuq ‘a boy was running away from his friends because of shyness’; qikmiq nuyaalghii qimagraalghii naghpighluku petugumakangat ‘they lassoed a dog that was running away because it was so so timid and they tethered it’	қимагрā-
qimagugh-	pos	IPA	to repeated run away	mekelghiighhaam naani qimagughaa ‘the little boy kept running away from his mother’	қимагуӷ-
qimpalungiq	pos	IPA	tanner crab (Chionoecetes bairdi)	No information given.	қимпалюңиқ
qimug-	pos	IPA	to be trained (of a dog being trained for sled use)	qimugtuq ‘it got trained’ / qimugtaa ‘he trained it’	қимуг-
qimugilnguq	pos	IPA	"hunter, from whom a wounded animal does not escape (according to folk belief)"	Chukotkan (R)	қимугилңуқ
qimugsigh-	pos	IPA	to travel by dogteam	qimugsightuq ‘he went by dogteam’ /	қимухсиӷ-
qimugsiq	pos	IPA	dogteam	No information given.	қимухсиқ
qimugtagh-	pos	IPA	to take a pup on a training run	No information given.	қимухтаӷ-
qimugtuqaq	pos	IPA	striker who strikes whales that are still so strong that they can get far away	sivuyagteni qimugtuqaq simighaa allaneng ‘he changed his striker who strikes whales that stay strong when struck’	қимухтуқақ
qimuk	pos	IPA	game animal	No information given.	қимук
qimukaq	pos	IPA	dog that has been trained for sled use	No information given.	қимукақ
qimuke-	pos	IPA	to pursue (it) as a game animal	qimukaa ‘he pursued it’ /	қимукы-
qineghpeghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to look at with telescope or binoculars	"qineghpeghwaaghtuq ‘he looked with a scope’; qineghpeghwaaghaa ‘he looked it with a scope’ / Esghaghhu Wangqetelem tazingken quyngiq qineghpeghwaaghyaghluku esghaamakanginkut. ‘See, while Wongitilin was looking with the binoculars for the reindeer, he saw us.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:12)"	қиныҳпыӷӱāӷ-
qineghpeghwaaghun	pos	IPA	telescope; binoculars	"used in the dual, qineghpeghwaaghutek, for a pair of binoculars"	қиныҳпыӷӱāӷун
qineghpugag-	pos	IPA	to look at with telescope or binoculars	No information given.	қиныҳпугаг-
qineghpugagun	pos	IPA	telescope; binoculars	"used in the dual, qineghpugagutek, for a pair of binoculars"	қиныҳпугагун
qineghte-	pos	IPA	"to look (or look at) through an opening, a window, door, sight, scope, etc."	qineghtuq ‘he looked through an opening’; qineghtaa ‘he looked at it through an opening’ / qineghten qergesegnekun! ‘look through the window!’; qiinghutaa taghnughhani esghiisqelluku whangkunnun ‘she looked out together with the baby letting us see the baby’	қиныҳты-
qingagh-	pos	IPA	to be persnickety (e.g. over food); to reject something (often food)	"qingaghtuq ‘he was being persnickety’, ‘he rejected something /"	қиңаӷ-
qingaghnalghii	pos	IPA	"unpredictable, dangerous or wild thing"	amsakaghtat ayveghet qingaghnalghiit ‘small walruses are unpredictable’; cf. qingagh-	қиңаӷналӷӣ
qingaghwiqe-	pos	IPA	"to become unpredictable, wild and hazardous"	"qingaghwiqsan siklaghnayukangisteng guusimakangat ‘when it became  wild, in case it came and hit the boat with it’s tusks, they shot it’; cf. qingagh-"	қиңаӷӱиқы-
qingakute-	pos	IPA	to stay away from others; to keep away from trouble	"nelliqelghiineng qingakullusinguq kiyaghtek ‘stay away from those that get into mischief’; qingakusimatmineng ilataamangilnguq ‘due to his not wanting to do things, he refrained from joining others’; cf. qingagh-"	қиңакуты-
qingakutke-	pos	IPA	to avoid trouble	No information given.	қиңакуткы-
qingaqe-	pos	IPA	to reject (it - food); to find (it - food) distasteful	qingaqaa ‘he doesn't want to taste or eat it’ /	қиңақы-
qingrag-	pos	IPA	to get away from annoyance or disturbance	cf. qingragh-	қиңраг-
qingragh-	pos	IPA	to conceal; to run away	"Chukotkan (R, V&E); cf. qingrag-"	қиңраӷ-
qingsig-	pos	IPA	to look aside at something; to glance at something; to glance at something	qingsigtuq ‘he glanced at something’; qingsigaa ‘he glanced at it’ /	қиңсиг-
qingsugaghte-	pos	IPA	to get a hangnail or broken fingernail	No information given.	қиңсюгаҳты-
qingwaangite-	pos	IPA	to disrespect the ownership rights of others	"qingwaangilliqesnanighaqiit avaqutateng angayuqam ‘parents tell their children not to bother another’s belongings’; qingwaangilnguq ‘one who does not respect the property of others, helps himself to it, plays with it’; cf. qingagh-"	қиңӱāңиты-
qinu-	pos	IPA	to be annoyed; to be disinclined to act	qinuuq ‘he is disinclined to act’ /	қину-
qinuke-	pos	IPA	to be annoyed with; to lack interest in; to be bored with; to be disinclined to do (it)	qinukaa ‘he is bored or annoyed with it’ / qinukluki qakemkut akuzighllaget amik uumgaa’ being annoyed by those talking so much outside the house he closed the door’; wiin qinukii sukilpalghun aftalaneghmeng ugliitneng apalluqluki ‘she feels no enthusiasm at this time for skinning the auklets because they are so numerous’	қинукы-
qinunaghqe-	pos	IPA	to tease; to pester; to provoke; to bother	"qinunaghquq ‘he is provoking others’; qinunaghqaa ‘he provoked him’ / mekelghiighhaq qinunaghqengngan apangan aghyuughaa ‘when the young boy misbehaved by bothering others, his grandfather scolded him’"	қинунаҳқы-
qinuyagute-	pos	IPA	to tire of (it); to begin to find it wearisome	qinuyagutaa ‘he tired of it’ / qinuyagulluki akuzighllaget amik uumgaa ‘she got tired of them talking so much and closed the door’	қинуягуты-
qinuyug-	pos	IPA	to feel overwhelmed by the tasks facing one; to get sick; to feel irritated from being pestered	qinuyugtuq ‘he got sick’ / qinuyugtestaa ‘it made him sick’; qinuyuguuq ‘he is sick’	қинуюг-
qinuyugte-	pos	IPA	to pester	"Aghnam piiqsaghaanguq, “Qinuyugtaghpenga, ingaghfiknaanghitamken, ingaghlluten qavaa.  Ingaghfiknaanghitngwaaghamken.”Ii, yugem qinuyugtaa. ‘The woman kept telling him, “You keep pestering me, but I won’t go to bed with you; you go to bed and sleep. I absolutely won’t go to bed with you. But, the man kept pestering her.’ (SULUWET 91)"	қинуюхты-
qipe-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > qiipe-, qipellegaq, qiperutaagh-, qipetaq, qipugh-, qipugute-"	қипы-
qipellegaq	pos	IPA	curly or kinky hair	No information given.	қипыльыгақ
qipengayak	pos	IPA	one with curly hair	Chukotkan (R)	қипыңаяк
qiperutaagh-	pos	IPA	to twist repeatedly	qiperutaaghutaak naangngwaaghaatek ‘he twisted the swing chains around and around’	қипырутāӷ-
qipesqinghaaghte-	pos	IPA	to soak too much (of boot soles)	aghisighagni puygulukek qipesqinghaaghsimalghiik ‘she forgot the boot soles she was soaking so they were soaked too much’; qipesqinghaaghtekak kinengllaghaqaak ‘the boot soles that were soaked too much are being dried out’	қипысқинӷаҳты-
qipesqinghaghte-	pos	IPA	to be overly soaked (of skin-boot soles being soaked before shaping)	No information given.	қипысқинӷаҳты-
"qipetaq, qiipetaq"	pos	IPA	doorknob; key; handle or latch operated by turning	No information given.	"қипытақ, қӣпытақ"
qipleghaghte-	pos	IPA	to break by twisting or being twisted too much	"ivenruutangita tukughakek qipleghaghsimalghiik ‘their outboard motor’s bottom part broke from being twisted back and forth too much’; tuquuqaq iiknaqluku qipleghaghsimakanga ‘they tried to take out the nail, but they broke it in two from twisting it too much’"	қипльыӷаҳты-
qipleghraasiq	pos	IPA	poker for fire	Chukotkan (R)	кипльыӷрāсиқ
qipleghte-	pos	IPA	to stir; knead; to shake up	Chukotkan (V&E)	қиплыҳты-
qipugh-	pos	IPA	"to wind a clock, watch, etc."	No information given.	қипуӷ-
qipugute-	pos	IPA	to mess things up	No information given.	қипугуты-
qipuqaq	pos	IPA	humpback whale (Megaptera novaeangliae); sperm whale (?)	"Chukotkan (R, V & E); Rubtsova (1975) glosses this as “sperm whale”; these whales are not found in the area, but their teeth are sometimes founded on beaches; Emelyanova and Vakhtin (1988) glosses this as “humbpack whale” which agrees with the meaning in other Eskimo languages"	қипуқақ
qirgesae	pos	IPA	window	"also dual, qirgesek, for one window; = qergesa; Unaaq qirgesegnekun qineghllunga tengegkayuget esghaghanka. ‘This morning I looked through the window and saw the airplane.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 143)"	қиргысяы
qirpaawi-	pos	IPA	to be eager and enthusiastic; to exert effort in order to finish a task (despite difficulties)	No information given.	қишпāӱи-
qisemna	pos	IPA	whetstone; rock used as whetstone; sharpening stone	Chukotkan (R); = qesemna	қисымна
qitaaqae	pos	IPA	silver or coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch)	No information given.	қитāқаы
qitavestaaq	pos	IPA	snare for catching auklets	qitavestaaghluku qawiimalghii kiwani naayghami ‘he caught a lot of birds by snare at the north end of the mountain’; qawaagniighusiilluku ayumiq qitavestaaghet sukilpaghniighusit ‘when there weren’t any shotguns they used bird snares to catch auklets’	қитавыстāқ
qitegh-	pos	IPA	to beat one's wife	qiitghaa ‘he beat her’; qiteneghmeng qenwat nuliini ungughtestaa apanganun ‘by his constantly beating his wife he caused her grandfather to take her back’	қитыӷ-
Qitelnguq	pos	IPA	site on Kittilngook Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 7 in Appendices	Қитылңуқ
qiteve-	pos	IPA	to speak a language different from Yupik; to jabber; to speak Chukchi	"qitevuq ‘he is speaking another language’, ‘he is jabbering’ or ‘he is speaking Chukchi’ / qitevutaa ‘he is talking to her in another language’, ‘he is jabbering to her’ or ‘he is speaking Chukchi to her’; Qiteva nagataqaa tespamani, aleghquutaqut katam whangkuta whaten aleghquunnemta. ‘I heard Chukchi spoken over there and they speak (it) just as (naturally) as we speak (our language).’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH.  2:198); Qitevaqelghii, tusaqigalkegka. ‘In as much as he would speak Chukchi, I didn’t understand him.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:192)"	қитывы-
qitik	pos	IPA	not until; if not for; until finally	Chukotkan (R); particle; = qituk	қитик
Qitnegaq	pos	IPA	Kitnagak Pt. (and bay) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Қитньыгақ
Qitnek	pos	IPA	Cape Kitnik on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Қитньык
qituk	pos	IPA	not until; if not for; until finally	"particle; Qituk maaken qineghpeghwaaghutkun esghaateqaghllunga maani enraq yulguftuq. ‘Finally I suddenly saw [one] from here with the binoculars, but it had [another] owner.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:176); = qitik"	қитук
qivagnaq	pos	IPA	bold person; one who isn’t shy and who doesn’t hesitate to do anything	"qivagnaatmineng qenwat avutkaghsiightuq ‘he’s so bold, not hesitant about doing anything, that he has been blamed for a lot of things’; qivagniqlaataghyan aghyuughumakanga ‘when he did anything he pleased again, he was scolded’"	қивагнақ
qivallekeltaq	pos	IPA	low pressure ridge but still difficult to walk across	see item 57 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қивальыкыльтақ
qivalluk	pos	IPA	"large pressure ridge, hard to walk across (requires climbing up and down); sea ice that has not leveled off and has lots of pressure ridges"	piyaqnaghtutkaaq qivallugestun ‘it is as rough as when there are pressure ridges blocking the way’; see item 58 in Oozeva et al. 2004	қивальюк
qive-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > qivesngagh-, qivenghak, qivalluk, qivallekeltaq"	қивы-
qivenghak	pos	IPA	sea ice field with piles of ice here and there	see item 59 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	қивынӷак
qivesnagh-	pos	IPA	to change direction repeatedly; to turn every which way	angyat taan’ga qivesnaghllaguut ‘the boat out there is continuously turning’; awiim sameng piluteng qivesnalghiit ‘they most likely saw something and kept on turning’; telaanangat qivesnaqaghluteng ifkaghtiit telaanangateng ‘the sailboat kept on turning then they dropped their sails’	қивыснаӷ-
qivghu-	pos	IPA	to be sorry about a loss; to grieve over the loss of a loved one or cherished possession; to regret	"qivghuuq ‘he is sorry, grieving’ / qivghulghiit takwaaghtiki ilutuqusiyaghtughqii ‘please go and give moral support to those who are grieving’; Ruuseghmiimun tawavek kelgutaa.  Qivghuuq tukfilleghmineng tawavek. Uuleghmiit puughtengngwaaghumakangat. ‘He revealed (what was going on) to the Russian. He (the Russian) regretted having bought it. The Uelen people had really fooled him.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:130)"	қивӷу-
qivghuke-	pos	IPA	to feel bad about (it); to feel sorry about about the loss of (it)	qivghukaa ‘he feels bad over it’ / qivghukaa qayuusiq sigiqluku ‘he sorry about breaking the cup’	қивӷукы-
qivghuli-	pos	IPA	to cause someone to feel bad (especially over a loss)	atani qivghulii ullghitak naafqellukek ‘he made his father feel bad by breaking the snowmachine’; kelengakluki piteki qivghulikengellequsi ‘watch closely or you will cause someone to feel bad’	қивӷули-
qivghunagh-	pos	IPA	to make one sad; to cause one ot grieve	qivghunaghtuq ‘it makes one sad’ or ‘it causes one to grieve’ /	қивӷунаӷ-
qivlegte-	pos	IPA	to ransack; to dig into things making a mess of them	qivlegtaa ‘he ransacked it’ /	қивлыхты-
qivraagh-	pos	IPA	to complain; to fuss; to gripe	applies to men only; qivraaghtuq ‘he is griping’ /	қиврāӷ-
"Qiwaa, Qiwaaq"	pos	IPA	"Kivak, former village in Chukotka"	see Map 3in Appendices	"Қиӱā, Қиӱāқ"
qiwaagh-	pos	IPA	to be shear short (of fur)	melqwa taaksagulluku qiwaaghluku atuumakanga ‘she cut the fur short and used it’	қиӱāӷ-
Qiwaaghmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Қиӱāӷмӣ(т)
qiwaaghnga-	pos	IPA	to have short fur	kaviiq naaptani ataasiq qiwaaghnganii melqwa ‘he said that one of the foxes he had trapped had short fur’	қиӱāӷңа-
qiya-	pos	IPA	to cry (shed tears)	qiyaaq ‘he cried’ / qiyaaquq ‘he is crying’ or ‘he cries’; qiyanghituq ‘he didn’t cry’; qiyangigatuq ‘he is not crying’ or ‘he doesn’t cry’; qiyamaaq ‘he has or had been crying’; qiyakaaguq ‘he did cry’; Qiyaghllagtuq aqniimaghmi. ‘She cried loudly being hurt.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:204)	қия-
qiyaaghqe-	pos	IPA	to intentionally make one cry	qiyaaghqaa ‘he made her cry’ / mekelghiighhaam naani qiyaaghqaa atani tuqukaq pugleraneghmeng ‘the little boy caused his mother to cry by bringing up things about his dead father’	қия̄ҳқы-
qiyaaghwagh-	pos	IPA	to cry very hard and long	qiyaaghwaghtuq ‘she cried her heart out’ /	қия̄ӷӱаӷ-
qiyamllagte-	pos	IPA	to whine; to whimper	Chukotkan (R)	қуямльахты-
qiyanaruug-	pos	IPA	to be annoyed or hurt; to feel like crying	Chukotkan (R); qiyanaruugpenang ‘don’t be annoyed or hurt; don’t feel like crying’	қиянарӯг-
qiyengllegte-	pos	IPA	to sob; to cry lightly	No information given.	қиӥыңльыхты-
qiyiqe-	pos	IPA	to cry off and on over a period of time; to weep	taghnughhaq qiyiquq aqsalliqluni ‘the infant kept crying when it had a stomachache’; nanevgaq qiyiquq ilakwaani esghaghluku qavngaghhaaneng esghiigalkenni ‘the old man wept when he saw his relatives that he hadn't seen for a long time’	қиӥиқы-
qiyvagniqe-	pos	IPA	to reach the limits	No information given.	қивагниқы-
qugaagpagni	pos	IPA	sour smell	No information given.	қугāхпагни
qugaagrugni	pos	IPA	sour smell	No information given.	қугāгругни
qugaak	pos	IPA	sour flavor	No information given.	қугāк
qugagh-	pos	IPA	to club; hit hard; to affix a knife or ax into a piece of wood	No information given.	қугаӷ-
qugaghsiigh-	pos	IPA	to chop wood for fuel	No information given.	қугаҳсӣӷ-
qugaghtaq1	pos	IPA	anal itch	No information given.	қугаҳтақ1
qugaghtaq2	pos	IPA	type of small fish	exact identification undetermined	қугаҳтақ2
qugake-	pos	IPA	to pay attention; to respond	qugakenghitaanguq iteghluni aleghqughyagu ‘they say he ignored her when she came in and talked to him’	қугакы-
qugakesingwaagh-	pos	IPA	to willfully ignore	qugakesingwaaghaa ‘he's ignoring him’ /	қугакысиңӱāӷ-
qugakigate-	pos	IPA	to be inattentive; to be unresponsive	No information given.	қугакигаты-
quganagh-	pos	IPA	to be disgraceful	yugem quganaghyagutaa nukalpigaq qepghaghpenani sameng kiyaghtaataghyan ‘the man considered the youth to be disgraceful since he was always loafing and never working’	қуганаӷ-
quganaghhalek	pos	IPA	how disgraceful!; how shameful!	exclamatory particle	қуганаҳалык
quganakruggaghmeng	pos	IPA	how dare he!	exclamatory particle	қуганакрухаӷмың
quganaqruggalek	pos	IPA	what a reckless person!; what a bad person!	exclamatory particle; Chukotkan (R)	қуганақшухалык
qugaqu-	pos	IPA	to hit repeatedly; to peck (of a bird)	No information given.	қугақу-
qugatagh-	pos	IPA	to hollow out	Chukotkan (R)	қугатаӷ-
qugataq	pos	IPA	chisel	Chukotkan (R)	қугатақ
qugelngiq	pos	IPA	mountain sorrel (Oxyria digyna)	cf. qugaak	қугылңиқ
qugeltaq	pos	IPA	dimple	"qugeltalget ineghneghmeggni qugeltiit aliighaqut ‘those with dimples who smile, make their dimples show’"	қугыльтақ
qugereghetaq	pos	IPA	wedge for splitting wood	ayumiq tugutmeng qugereghetaqluteng unaghsit quupegkayuwit ‘long ago they used walrus ivory for wedges to split wood’	қугырыӷытақ
qugerngugh-	pos	IPA	to screech; to yelp; to smile frequently with laughter; to coo (baby’s sound)	No information given.	қугырңуӷ-
qugesliipak	pos	IPA	hoary redpoll (Carduelis hornemanni); common redpoll (Carduelis flammea)	No information given.	қугысльӣпак
qugeyegte-	pos	IPA	to giggle quietly (in excitement)	sangameng aghnaghaat qugeyegtaqat? ‘why are the girls giggling quietly?’	қугыӥыхты-
qughagh-	pos	IPA	to dangle; to hang down; to sag	qughaghtuq ‘it sagged’ / qughaghtaa ‘he let it hang’; atkuyaaghqek qukamegnekun piigllagluten enkaam qughaghllaglutek ‘her dress has a large rip in the waist so it sags quite a bit’; telephone-em wayii kepkaghluteng qughaghtuutut ‘the telephone wires are broken and dangling’	қуӷаӷ-
qughaghtaq	pos	IPA	hanging mat made of grass used for insulation in a tent	"used in the plural, qughaghtat, for one such mat"	қуӷаҳтақ
qughalkutaq	pos	IPA	earring	No information given.	қуӷалькутақ
qughaseketaq	pos	IPA	hanging thing	"upenghami mangtegham roof-ngan esnengi qughaseketiightaqut, qusukiightaqut ‘in the spring hanging icicles form at the bottom edge of roofs’"	қуӷасыкытақ
qughaseketiigh	pos	IPA	to dangle	No information given.	қуӷасыкытӣӷ-
qughlaa	pos	IPA	Karo brand commercial syrup (or a similar syrup)	No information given.	қуӷля̄
qughri	pos	IPA	urine stain or residue	No information given.	қуӷри-
qughriitaq	pos	IPA	bunched dried grass used for personal hygiene; rag (especially one made of bunched grass)	qughriitat kuuvelleghmun samun sangighquusit sivughaqluki ‘rags are used to wipe something that was spilled and then are wrung’	қуӷрӣтақ
qughru	pos	IPA	the number ten (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	қюӷру
qughsatku	pos	IPA	large polar bear; “king” polar bear	"described as being furless around the ankles, having a solid rib cage and breast bone making it almost impossible to spear except in one spot on the front of the neck; called ""king polar bear"" in local English; Alla tawaten naghaaghuteghllaglutenguq amaken Uygunaneng nanughllagem ivgaamaaki qughsatkum. Qughsatkum uugfikumakangi. Nanughllagem tuququumaa taghnughhaq tamaana. ‘One time they were playing and a big polar bear, a king polar bear, came upon them from behind Point Uygunat.  The king polar bear  came up ashore going  over to them. The big polar bear killed all those children.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:62)"	қуӷсятку
qugiikaq	pos	IPA	pickled food	ayveghem tengugi qugiisighat qugiikameng aatqut ‘pickled walrus liver is called pickled food’	қугикақ
qugiisigh-	pos	IPA	to pickle or ferment meat	No information given.	қугӣсиӷ-
qugili-	pos	IPA	to get fat	"Kaangut uksaaghmi qugilighllagaqelghiit. ‘The snow geese get very fat in the fall.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 70); cf. quginaq, qugintagh-"	қугили-
qugina-	pos	IPA	ticklish	"emotional root; quginayugtuq ‘he feels ticklish’; quginankaa or quginayukaa ‘he feels tickeled by it’; quginayuketaq or qiginaketaq ‘one who is ticklish by nature’; quginanaq ‘something that is ticklish’; quginayugsaghaa ‘he is trying to make her feel ticklish with something (feather, fur, etc., not fingers)"	қугина-
quginag-	pos	IPA	terrified especially of the supernatural; spooked; scared	"emotional root; quginagnaq ‘spooky thing, scarey thing, terrifying thing’; quginagyugtuq ‘he is terrified, spooked, scared’; quginakaa or quginagyukaa ‘he is terrified or spooked of it’; quginaketaq ‘one who is easily frightened or spooked’"	қугинаг-
quginaq	pos	IPA	fat; blubber	"cf. qugintagh-, qugili-"	қугинақ
qugintagh-	pos	IPA	to be fat	"cf. quginaq, qugili-"	қугинтаӷ-
qugneq	pos	IPA	crack in shore ice	"Chukotkan (R); used in the dual, qugneghek, for one crack"	қугнық
qugtuqaghmig-	pos	IPA	to put into the baggy leg of old-fashioned bloomers with drawstrings at the knee	No information given.	қухтуқаӷмиг-
qugtuqaghmik	pos	IPA	thing put into the baggy leg of old-fashioned bloomers with drawstrings at the knee	No information given.	қухтуқаӷмик
qugtuqaq	pos	IPA	thigh	No information given.	қухтуқақ
qukaayug-	pos	IPA	to boast	literally: to want to be the center (of attention)	қукāюг-
qukaghite-	pos	IPA	to get or place to the center of something; to reach the middle	"naayghamun mayulghii qukaghilluni meghnaalimalghii ‘when he was climbing the mountain and got halfway up, he rested’; laawaaghmun qukaghilluku unaghsiq napaghlluku peghunakesi ‘place the stick upright in the center of the dug out hole and bury it’"	қукаӷиты-
qukaghmii	pos	IPA	man in whaling boat who throws out the second float	No information given.	қукаӷмӣ
qukaghte-	pos	IPA	"to be halfway through; to fill halfway; to be at the middle of a time span (day, month, year, etc.)"	qukaghlluku glass-a imighhu! ‘fill the glass halfway!’; Palighvik qukaghtuq ‘August is half through’	қукаҳты-
qukaghun	pos	IPA	narrow beaded band for amulets formerly worn around the waist by women	No information given.	қукаӷун
qukaq	pos	IPA	middle; center; waist; lower back	qukaani ‘in the middle of it’	қукақ
qukaqliq	pos	IPA	middle one	No information given.	қукақлиқ
qukasalegh-	pos	IPA	to be or hit right in the middle	"Unaghsiq qalqalimaluku petgeghviklunga taatka qukasaleghluku sukisimalghiinga. ‘While I was chopping wood, a piece shot to my forehead, leaving a sliver right in the middle.’ (SULUWET 109)"	қукасалыӷ-
"qukfighte-, qukfightagh-"	pos	IPA	to part the hair and pull back each half behind the ears; to open a book flat 	igat qukfightaghluki yuvghiighii ‘she went through the pages and looked at it’	"қукфиҳты-, қукфиҳтаӷ-"
qukfighun	pos	IPA	barret for hair	No information given.	қукфиӷун
qukfighute-	pos	IPA	to make a V-shaped wake (when a boat moves across the water)	"angyat igleghsalghiimeng qukfighutut ‘when the boat traveled, it left a V-shaped wake’"	қукфиӷуты-
qukiinaani	pos	IPA	unimportant; doesn’t matter one way or the other	"particle (?); tengegkayuk aqumutiiskan qukiinaani pinghisaghngaaghmi ayuquq ‘if the airplane doesn’t have any available seats, it doesn’t matter if he goes or not’; ullghitagni aghyuqak qukiinaani naavyaghqngaayek lliighumaak ‘he doesn’t care if his snowmachine breaks because it’s so old’"	қукӣнāни
qula2	pos	IPA	whip	Chukotkan (R)	қула2
qulae1	pos	IPA	upper part; area above; gunwale of boat; (the number) ten	"the numbers eleven through fourteen and sixteen through nineteen are based on qula ‘ten’: qula ataasiq siipneqluku ‘eleven’, qula maalghuk siipneqlukek ‘twelve’; qula pingayut siipneqluki ‘thirteen’, qula estamat siipneqluki ‘fourteen’, qula aghvinlek siipneqluku ‘sixteen’, qula maaghraghvinlek siipneqluku ‘seventeen’, qula pingayuneng inglulek siipneqluku ‘eighteen’, qula estamaneng inglulek siipneqluku ‘nineteen’; examples of various uses of qula: naaygham quulnga paagna tagitugem saapaqaa ‘the upper part of that mountain up there is obscured by the fog’; qulangiilluku neghaqluten ‘eat with something right below your food’; quulvani ‘up high’, quulmun ‘upwards’; qulanganeng or quulnganeng ‘from above’; qulaneng qikmilguuq ‘he has ten dogs’; Mangteghami whani qula ayumiqulleq kiyaghtunga. ‘I lived in this house for ten years.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 80); Qula angyaq angyaghuutuq. ‘Ten boats went out hunting.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 144)"	қуляы1
qulaghwaaghite-	pos	IPA	to be a spendthrift	"ulimaaghmeng tukfightulghii qulaghwaaghituq ‘the one buying ivory carvings doesn’t care how much they cost’; qulaghwaaghitutmineng sangwaa alngunak pilaghaa ‘on account of his spendthrift ways, he bought whatever he wanted’"	қулаӷӱāӷиты-
quleghtaq	pos	IPA	tarp fastened around gunwale of boat to keep water out; spray skirt	No information given.	қулыҳтақ
qulighneq	pos	IPA	upper part	No information given.	қулиӷнық
qulighuraak	pos	IPA	side rail of sled	No information given.	қулиӷурāк
qulighwaaq	pos	IPA	single strip of decoration on the bottom of  a snow shirt	Chukotkan (R)	қулиӷӱāқ
qulighyak1	pos	IPA	red phalarope (Phalaropus fulicarius)	No information given.	қулиӷьяк1
qulighyak2	pos	IPA	broth made from the liquid used when sealskin is processed to remove hair	ayumiq itagsim sameng neqmeng entaqunllu egtiirakangigalnguut qulighyak ulimaaqegkangat ‘long ago they probably made edible broth from the liquid used in processing sealskin to remove hair’	қулиӷьяк2
quliiwhtaq	pos	IPA	tarp fastened around gunwale of boat to keep water out; spray skirt	"may be used in the plural, quliiwhtat, for one such tarp"	қулӣӱьтақ
qulite-	pos	IPA	to wash one’s hair	qulituq ‘she is washing her (own) hair’; qulitaa ‘she is washing her (another's) hair’ /	қулиты-
qulleghrak	pos	IPA	walrus skin used to cover a summer house	Chukotkan (R)	қульыӷрак
qullig-	pos	IPA	to put on pants	qulligtuq ‘he put pants on (himself)’; qulligaa ‘he put pants on him (another)’ /	қульиг-
qulligek	pos	IPA	pants	this a dual; the singular would be qullik; the term qulligek refers especially or traditionally to inner pants of reindeer skin; qulligegka ‘my pants’; qullilguuq ‘he has pants’; qulligightuq ‘he took off his pants’	қульигык
qulligpagek	pos	IPA	snow-pants; padded overpants	this is a dual; the singular would be qulligpak	қульихпагык
qullikaq	pos	IPA	edible root of glacier avens (Geum glaciale or Novosieversia flacias)	No information given.	қульикақ
qullingestaq	pos	IPA	woman’s tights	"used in the dual, qullingestak, for one pair of tights"	қульиңыстақ
qullipigek	pos	IPA	skin pants in contrast to cloth pants	this is a dual; the singular would be qullipik	қульипигык
qulliraaghek	pos	IPA	cloth pants in contrast to skin pants	this is a dual; the singular would be qulliraaq	қульирāӷык
qulluk	pos	IPA	commode; “honey bucket”; motor well in boat	"the meaning ‘motor well’ is Chukotkan; also used in the dual, qullugek,  for one commode or motor well"	қульюк
qulmesighaq	pos	IPA	a pot’s worth or quantity of tomcot	Chukotkan (R); used in the plural qulmesighat	қулмысиӷақ
qulmesiin1	pos	IPA	small cooking pot with a handle; saucepan	"Igaasitaq taana nanim ellngaatanganeng, qulmesiitem puyaaneng akuutkameng imalek tagnepiglleghhiimeng. ‘The paintpot was filled with the dregs from an oil lamp mixed with soot from a cooking pot, all very black.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222) "	қулмысӣн1
qulmesiin2	pos	IPA	sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus sp.)	No information given.	қулмысӣн2
qulmesiitngwaaq	pos	IPA	sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus sp.)	Chukotkan (R)	қулмысӣтңьӱāқ
qulqesaati-	pos	IPA	to place a pot of food right above the flame to cook it quickly; to place wet clothing right above the flame to dry it quickly	qulqesaalluki aatkat kinengyugnaghqiteki ‘place the clothes right above the stove so they can dry quickly’; qulmesiin qulqesaalluku nanimun gaaragkiightuq ‘the pot was placed right above the lamp and it quickly cooked’	қульқысāти-
qulqesaghqe-	pos	IPA	to get to the area above (it)	"ayveq kaalluku qulqesaghqelluku naghullgaa ‘they got to the walrus, the striker got right above it and cast the harpoon at it’"	қульқысаҳқы-
qulqisiigh-	pos	IPA	to elevate something from ground or floor; to raise	"nunaaghmi qavaghnaqngami qulqisiighluni ingaghsimalghii ‘when was going to sleep at camp, he made a make-shift bed and went to bed’; llivelghaghqameng qulqisiighluteng llilaghtuumalghiit ‘they made a shelf above the floor and placed stuff on it’"	қульқисӣӷ-
qulqite-	pos	IPA	to reach the top or the upper level	= quulqite-	қульқиты-
quma	pos	IPA	intestinal worm; tapeworm	No information given.	қума
qumig-	pos	IPA	to put inside front of parka	No information given.	қумиг-
qumigagh-	pos	IPA	to climb pole using the legs; to shinny up a pole	unaghsiq napaghngalghii qumigameng mayughaa ‘he climbed a pole that was upright’	қумигаӷ-
qumik	pos	IPA	thing carried inside parka or coat; fetus	No information given.	қумик
qumikesegagh-	pos	IPA	to sit with legs folded	Chukotkan (V&E)	қумикысыгаӷ-
quminge-	pos	IPA	to become pregnant	No information given.	қумиңы-
Qumlangilquq	pos	IPA	Koomlangeelkuk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Қумляңильқуқ
qumsegte-	pos	IPA	"to close legs, scissors, jack knife, window, door or other hinged pair of things; to wink"	qumsegtuq ‘he put his legs together’; pumsukegtaatek qumsegtaak ‘he put the blades of the scissors together’; iiymineng qumsegutaanga ‘he winked at me (with his eye)’	қумсыхты-
qumsekegte-	pos	IPA	to get one's fingers or other body part or other thing pinched between two things	qumsekegtaanga kumlumkun taam amigkun umegluku ‘he got my thumb caught closing the door’	қумсыкыхты-
qunagh-	pos	IPA	eyes closed; dead	"postural root; qunaghtuq ‘he closed his eyes’; qunaghmi igleghtuq ‘he is walking around with his eyes closed’; qunaamsiighwaghtuq ‘he has his eyes partly closed or keeps closing them’, ‘he closed his eyes (napped) for a while’; qunaghngaaq ‘his eyes are closed’ or ‘he is dead’ (euphemism); = qunegh-"	қунаӷ-
qunegh-	pos	IPA	eyes closed; dead	"postural root; quneghtuq ‘he closed his eyes’; qunaghmi igleghtuq ‘he is walking around with his eyes closed’;  “Quneghten, esghaghhaaten apeghiiqumken.” Aqumuq meteghlluk uyghagem saaghwakun, quneghtuq. ‘‘Close your eyes, you can look at it, when I’m done with you.” The raven sat down on the side of the rock, and closed his eyes.’ (AANGHHAQ 27); quneghngaaq ‘his eyes are closed’ or ‘he is dead’ (euphemism); = qunagh-"	қуныӷ-
qunengllagh-	pos	IPA	to rock to sleep	aghnaghaghhaam uyughaghhani qunengllaghaqaa ‘the girl is rocking her younger sibling to sleep’	қуныңльаӷ-
qunereng	pos	IPA	furthermore; moreover	"particle; may have the implication of something being unsatisfactory or insufficient; aghsaan qunereng mekestaaghhaghmeng tuuniinkut ikellesqughaq mangtak ‘moreover he gave us such a tiny slice of whale meat’; Getgam piiqaanga, ""Nallaghaq qunereng Sivuqami uksughtekayuk. Nasani efsikigalkanga. Nasaghwaaghllak iiwleng."" ‘Getga was saying to me, “Furthermore Nallaghaq can spend the winters in Gambell. He doesn’t get tired of (wearing) his parka hood. He always has hood on.”’ (PANGEGH. 40)"	қунырың
qungae	pos	IPA	the midst; the middle of an area; main idea; center; source; core	nem qungangakun mangteghangllaghtukut ‘we built our house in the middle of town’; sangwaa quungkutanga nallukaghput ‘we don't know what the source of the talk is’	қуңаы
qungangiite-	pos	IPA	to reach the center; to acculturate	"uyghagamunllu iiwenllu qungangiitaquq tengegkayuget paga naghughtut ‘as he was coming to the middle of the rocky area, an airplane passed by’; legan taawa qungangiitngwaaghluni lliightuq Ungazighmiinun ima tamaavek tagiyuggaalleghmineng ‘he is really becoming accustomed to being among the Ungaziq people now compared to how he was when he first came there some time ago’"	қуңаңӣты-
qungeghruk	pos	IPA	upper part of back near neck	neghsam qungeghruggiinaan amiiraa iikluku atuumakanga ‘she took off the upper part of the back of a sealskin and used it’; qikmighaq qungeghruggakun tuguluku ananusimakanga ‘he picked up the puppy by the upper part of its back and took it out’	қуңыӷрук
qungeghruk	pos	IPA	lower back of neck; upper part of back	Teghigluget esgha repall qungeghrugi aliighaqut qenughhaghavleghaghmi maalkam angtalanganeng. ‘But the young bearded seals were coming up with their backs showing through the surface of the thin slush ice.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:154)	қуңыӷруӷ
qungeliqaq	pos	IPA	pirog (Russian style stuffed pastry)	Chukotkan (R)	қуңылиқақ
qungevagh-	pos	IPA	to go further inwards or inland	angyat mellaatkat wata qungevaatii ‘the boat that was closed in by the ice went further into the ice’; amiiqaq qungevaqwaaqun putulaghnaken sevnayukan ‘make the holes on the walrus skin further in towards the center lest they tear’	қуңываӷ-
qungevaq	pos	IPA	inward or inland area	No information given.	қуңывақ
qungllaagh-	pos	IPA	to part the hair in the middle	sivukluku nuyaa qungllaaghluku taqughtaa ‘first she parted her hair and then braided it’; enraq sanivaqaaqun qungllaaghumayaqanga ‘she made the part in hair too far on the side however’; naasqum qukaakun qunglaaghaqiit ‘they part them on the center of the head’	қуңльāӷ-
qungllaaq	pos	IPA	part in center of hair	No information given.	қуңльāқ
qunglug-	pos	IPA	"to submerge (of seals, walrus, people)"	No information given.	қуңлюг-
qungragaghte-	pos	IPA	to chip; to crack; to split	Ulimaaqa igarutaaghluku qungragaghtaqa. ‘I chipped my carving drilling a hole in it.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 145)	қуңрагаҳты-
qungsig-	pos	IPA	to be easily split for thread making (of sinew)	natelnguum emta ivalungi qungsigniiqiit ‘they say a certain sinew is easy to split’; qungsilghiimeng ivalungnaqutkaqelghiin’nguq ‘they say they try to get got sinew that is easy to split’	қуңсиг-
qungsugh-	pos	IPA	to rest after giving birth with one's legs flexed and upper body bent over them	No information given.	қуңсюӷ-
qungugh-	pos	IPA	to bury; to inter	No information given.	қуңуӷ-
qungughaq 	pos	IPA	cemetery	Chukotkan	қуңуӷақ
qungughnagh-	pos	IPA	"to be downcast, joyless"	Chukotkan (R); cf. qungughte-	қуңуӷнаӷ-
qungughte-	pos	IPA	to hang one's head down; to rest forehead on crossed arms	qungtaghaa ‘put your head and shoulders down a little’; cf. qunguq; qungughnagh-	қуңуҳты-
qungughvik	pos	IPA	grave; cemetery	No information given.	қуңуӷвик
qunguq	pos	IPA	scruff of neck; top of back	cf. qungughte-	қуңуқ
Qunguvak	pos	IPA	"site in Chukotka, on Ittygran Island"	see Map 3 in Appendices	қуңувак
qungvughaq*	pos	IPA	minke whale (Balaenoptera acutorostrata)	No information given.	қуңвуӷақ
qungyagh-	pos	IPA	to be envious; to be jealous	qungyaghtuq ‘he is jealous or envious’ / qungyaatkaa ‘he is envious on account of it’; applies to jealousy concerning man-woman relations and jealousy or envy for other reasons as well; Atilqa Private Mate-nguuq. Taakut qungyaghnayukata umiilgataghaghpigaat. ‘My title was Private Mate. I feared least the others  become jealous  due to the promotion.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:146)	қуңьяӷ-
qungyaghtaq	pos	IPA	jealous or envious person	No information given.	қуңьяҳтақ
qungyaghuq	pos	IPA	the upper back and neck area of a bull walrus that has lots of bumps	quyngyagughtuqat mangunat qetustaaghhaaniiqiit ‘they say the really bumpy parts of a bull walrus are tender	қуңьяӷуқ
qungyallek	pos	IPA	area of boat around stern	Chukotkan (R)	қуңьяльык
"qungyaqe-, qungyake-"	pos	IPA	to be envious or jealous of (him)	qungyaqaa ‘he is envious of her’ /	"қуңьяқы-, қуңьякы-"
quni	pos	IPA	tear; teardrop	quningi ‘his tears’; quni atuqaa aghnam qivghumam ‘the woman is shedding lots of tears due to being sad’	қуни
quniluugte-	pos	IPA	to become teary-eyed; to get tears all over one’s face	mekelghiighhaq quniluugteghllagtuq ‘the little boy is becoming covered with tears on his face’	қунилю̄хты-
qunqalleg-	pos	IPA	to blink	cf. quunqagh-	қунқальыг-
qunqavyugte-	pos	IPA	to squint	No information given.	қунқавюхты-
qupak	pos	IPA	girl's hair beads	"used in the plural, qupaget, for one whole set consisting of an ivory button worn near the top of a braid with strings of beads attached to it and looping down the braid; qupagenka ‘my hairbeads’"	қупак
qupasqiq	pos	IPA	earring	Chukotkan (V&E)	қупасқиқ
qupayuqaq	pos	IPA	"prickly, sharp thing"	Chukotkan (R)	қупаюқақ
qupe-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > quupe, qupugh-, quperghu-, quperghuugh-"	қупы-
qupeq	pos	IPA	ice blink; reflection of ice on clouds above seen from far away	"angyat qupengyaalluteng siku kaasimakangat upenghami nunavagtuqaq ‘the boat went to the place indicated by the ice blink, the reflection of ice on the clouds, in spring and it had lots of walrus’"	қупық
quperghu-	pos	IPA	to cut alongside a small part of something	Chukotkan (R)	қупырӷу-
quperghuugh-	pos	IPA	to decorate front of sealskin water boots with narrow strips of bleached sealskin with waterproof seams	= qeperghuugh-	қупырӷӯӷ-
qupigh-	pos	IPA	to put on hair beads	aghnaghaat quliquuluteng qupightuusimalghiit ‘the girls washed their hairs and put beads on the hair as they braided it’	қупиӷ-
qupneq	pos	IPA	whitefish; Bering Cisco (Coregonus laurettae)	No information given.	қупньық
quprughaghaq	pos	IPA	small clam	exact identification undetermined; cf. quprughaq	қупшуӷаӷақ
quprughaq	pos	IPA	horned puffin (Fratercula corniculata)	No information given.	қупшуӷақ
quprughneq	pos	IPA	old barren female walrus	No information given.	қупшуӷнық
qupugh-	pos	IPA	to split more than one thing	No information given.	қупуӷ-
qupughhagh-	pos	IPA	to have one's hair become wet and stringy	qikmighhaq qupughhaghaa pugimaghluni ‘the little dog's hair got wet and stringy after it swam’	қупуҳаӷ-
qupughhugh-	pos	IPA	to cut or split lengthwise; to rip (cut with the grain)	qamiskani pilagtumeng qupughhughaqeftaa ‘he was apparently cutting wood into strips for his sled’; qupughhuusikun sukalluku qupughhuumaa ‘he cut it fast with a ripsaw’	қупуҳуӷ-
qupughragh-	pos	IPA	to split or cut into strips	No information given.	қупуӷраӷ-
qupuma	pos	IPA	woman (shaman’s word)	Chukotkan; qupumannguq qerngughunnaqut ‘the women are about to get together’	қупума
quq-quq	pos	IPA	a signal to warn of animals appearing from water	Chukotkan (R)	қуқ-қуқ
quqighnagh-	pos	IPA	to be peppy; to be full of energy	basketball-esta quqighnaatmineng aangqameng kanaghqughtuq ‘the basketball player kept on making baskets due to his being so peppy’	қуқуӷнаӷ-
quqiigh-	pos	IPA	to attract the attention of a passerby by putting a stick up through the ceiling ventilator and making noise	No information given.	қуқӣӷ-
quqiiq	pos	IPA	dovekie (Alle alle)	No information given.	қуқӣқ
ququngaq	pos	IPA	leaf; edible leaf of low-bush willow (Salix pulchra); tea	No information given.	қуқуңақ
quragnaq	pos	IPA	"slow, inactive or passive person"	esghaqaaluni quragnaq sehleghlluguftuq piyalghiimi ‘he looked like an inactive person but turned out to be pretty good and efficient’	қурагнақ
qurgu	pos	IPA	dwarf Siberian pine (Pinus cembra)	Chukotkan; = qergu	қургу
qurimti	pos	IPA	rock used (as balast?) to secure a boat from wind	Chukotkan (R)	қуримти
qurughneq	pos	IPA	bundle of dried fish	No information given.	қуруӷнық
qusak	pos	IPA	"thin crack (as in tusk) caused by dryness, pressure, etc."	"used in the dual, qusagek, for one crack; Llangaqa tugutem qusagkek unaaghniineng avlelghiik. ‘It looks as though the crack on the tusk is wider than it was this morning.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 85)"	қусяк
qusevegnagh-	pos	IPA	to be modest or humble	cf. qusevegte-	қузывыгнаӷ-
qusevegte-	pos	IPA	to be modest or humble	"qusevegneghet yuget sameng seghleghmeng qingaakulluteng kiyaghtaaghet, yukeghqegpenateng ‘modest or humble people dislike wrong-doing and do not act conceited’; Tamaakut qusevegngalghiit quyastellelguut, qayughllak Kiyaghneghem tuunyaghqaqaa nuna ellngitnun. ‘Blessed are the meek, for God will give the world to them.’ (Matthew 5:5); cf. qusevegnagh-"	қусувыхты-
qusighneq	pos	IPA	hairline crack	qusighneghmikun peluusa pelleghtuq ‘the saucer fell apart at its hairline crack’	қусиӷнық
qusighqe-	pos	IPA	to develop or cause cracks especially when weight is applied	qusighquq ‘it is getting cracked’; qusighqaa ‘he cracked it by putting weight on it’	қусиҳқы-
qusma	pos	IPA	kind of grass with tubrous root; wild rhubarb (?) root	Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined	қусмьа
qutae	pos	IPA	land; landmass seen from the sea; Chukotka; Siberia	"angyami piiq yuuk ""quta aliightuq"" ‘the man in the boat said ""land is in sight""’"	қутаы
quteghllak	pos	IPA	Chukotka; Siberia	"literally, ‘the big (main)land’; Neqamikeghllagluku ayuqaat laalighqwaalleghteng Sivuqaghhmiit Quteghllagmun.  Puygulleghqiitaat. ‘People remember well how it was when St. Lawrence Islanders  visited Siberia. They definitely won’t forget it.’ (PANGEGH. 1)"	қутыҳльяк
qutenge-	pos	IPA	to reach the shore; to find land after being lost at sea	iflakat angyat qutengluteng uughqaalluteng yuvghiightut naantuleyeng liinnaluku ‘the lost boat (crew) looked around to see where they were upon reaching land and disembarking’	қутыңы-
qutepik	pos	IPA	mainland; dry safe land as opposed to rocks or marsh; Chukotka; Siberia	No information given.	қутыпик
qutngugh-	pos	IPA	bending over forward with head down while in a sitting position	postural root; qutngughtuq ‘he bent over forward’; qutnughngaaq ‘he is bent over forward’	қутңьуӷ-
qutngughruk	pos	IPA	upper part of ~	No information given.	қутңьуӷрук
qutug-	pos	IPA	to snore	qutugtuq ‘he snored’ /	қутуг-
qutuq	pos	IPA	collarbone	No information given.	қутуқ
quugniigh-	pos	IPA	to look for firewood	No information given.	қӯгнӣӷ-
quugsaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to look for firewood on the shore by boat	No information given.	қӯхсяҳтуӷ-
quugsiigh-	pos	IPA	to get firewood	No information given.	қӯхсӣӷ-
quugsiiqaq	pos	IPA	log	No information given.	қӯхсӣқақ
quugte-	pos	IPA	to get firewood	No information given.	қӯхты-
quuk1	pos	IPA	whistling swan (Olor columbianus)	"quugem uyaqghwa taakestaaghhaaguq ‘the swan’s neck is long’; Satelgaq, quuk, yungaghaqulluni kiigem qawaaga, pennam qawaaga katelghaatuq …. ‘The crane and the swan, together with the  jaeger, the summer bird and the cliff bird, have all arrived, ….’   (SIKU. ESL. ESGHA. 106)"	қӯк1
quuk2	pos	IPA	firewood; wood	"Uksumi quugkaaluki nalighmeng mayughtiiqut unaghsimeng. ‘In the winter that’s their supply of firewood piled up, also wood for making things.’ (MRS. DELL W. 8)"	қӯк2
quullimaqe-	pos	IPA	to look after someone’s health and wealth	Chukotkan (R)	қӯльӣмақ-
quulngughun	pos	IPA	tenth one	also quulngughuta; Quulngughutangani aghneghmi nutaan qaygeghllequten. ‘On the tenth day you will reach the top.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 17)	қӯлңуӷун
quulqin	pos	IPA	loft in semi-subterranean house	No information given.	қӯльқин
quulqite-	pos	IPA	to reach the top or the upper level	= qulqite-	қӯльқиты-
quultak	pos	IPA	type of girl’s short decorated pants	this is a dual	қӯльтак
quulvani	pos	IPA	up high	particle	қулвани
quulvekesiiq	pos	IPA	pintail duck (Anas acuta)	No information given.	қӯлвыкысӣқ
quumsagte-	pos	IPA	to tower over	No information given.	қӯмсяхты-
quumziigh-	pos	IPA	to gather kindling	No information given.	қӯмзӣӷ-
quumziiq	pos	IPA	kindling	No information given.	қӯмзӣқ
quun	pos	IPA	you see; you know	Chukotkan; particle; see also enclitic =qun	қӯн
quungvaq	pos	IPA	east; east wind; area further up from shore or border	"quungvani ‘in the area further up’; quungvaghaa ‘the wind is shifting towards the east’; ggutanga quungvaqun ilefkaghaghsimaaq, iingqaan tungangakun ‘his tooth broke off up near the gum area’; angyam asiilleghqaa quungvaghaa ‘he cut the piece farther up off the part where an additional skin is to be sewn on the side of a skin boat’; cf. qungevaq"	қӯңвақ
quunpekaghtaq	pos	IPA	something from the distant past or that has existed forever	No information given.	қӯнпыкаҳтақ
quunpeng	pos	IPA	always; at all times	"adverbial particle; awen quunpeng ‘almost always, usually’; quunpeng avelghaghpenani igaghyaghaquq ‘he always goes to school without missing any days’; quunpeng kiinghani Sivuqaghtaqunga ‘I always go to Gambell in the summer’; … Quyillget taakut anglegutkullghiit yuget tallimat. Quyngimeggnun quunpeng piiqelghiit elngaatall. ‘… apparently five Chukchi siblings. They go to their reindeer all the time.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:2); Uksumi uqfigam tangillghem qaamnangi amestaaghhaat, saghnaaqelghiit. Enkaam petugtaaghaqegkangit aagrani quunpeng kineghngiita. ‘In wintertime, the part we eat of the willow that is thin is picked. So then, they are tied at all times in the sleeping area of the house while being dried.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:236)"	қӯнпың
quunperugllak	pos	IPA	forever	quunperugllak kenlengunaan kiyaghlleq ‘life everlasting’	қӯнпырухльяк
quunqagh-	pos	IPA	to wink; to blink	"quunqaataa ‘he winked at her’; cf. qunagh-, qunqalleg-"	қӯнқаӷ-
quupaghneq	pos	IPA	crack	quuk quupaghneghakun pelleghtaa ‘he split the piece of firewood along the crack’	қӯпаӷнық
quupaghte-	pos	IPA	to crack; to split	No information given.	қӯпаҳты-
quupe-	pos	IPA	to split; to cut in two lengthwise	quupuq ‘it split’; quupaa ‘he split it’ / qukaakun quupaa amiq ‘he split the skin down the middle’	қӯпы-
quupkagh-	pos	IPA	to be shocked; to be amazed	"Elngaatall quupkaamalghii unkuseni esghaghyaqminiki kaviighhaghnguq taawa naapsimalghii. ‘To his utter amazement, when he looked there was a fox caught in his trap.’ (SULUWET 60)"	ңӯпкаӷ-
quupkaq	pos	IPA	bad or tragic surprise	No information given.	қӯпкақ
quupneq	pos	IPA	piece cut lengthwise from something; split thing	No information given.	қӯпнық
quupun1	pos	IPA	large crack in sea ice	No information given.	қӯпун1
quupun2	pos	IPA	strip of fur (one of four) on a woman’s fur pants (qaallnaak)	No information given.	қӯпун2
Quurkeli	pos	IPA	hero/trickster raven (especially in Chukotkan stories)	Naayghami Kiyaghtaaq Quurkeli Meteghlluk ‘The raven Quurkeli Who Lived at a Mountain’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 101)	Қӯшкыли
quusqe-	pos	IPA	to pull up one's shoulders and pull down one's head; to shrug one's shoulders; to huddle up from cold	= quuste-	қӯсқы-
quuste-	pos	IPA	to pull up one's shoulders and pull down one's head; to shrug one's shoulders; to huddle up from cold	= quusqe-	қӯсты-
quutak	pos	IPA	pair of suspenders	this is a dual; the singular would be quutaq	қӯтак
quutfaq	pos	IPA	north	 ‘Anuqa quutfaghmeng ayuqeftuq.’ The wind is coming from the north.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 146)	қӯтфақ
Quutmii	pos	IPA	Chukotkan person (especially a Yupik); Siberian (mainland) person	"Quutmiit ‘the (Yupik) people of Chukotka’ (as opposed to St. Lawrence Island); Quutmiistun ‘in the Yupik language as spoken by the Chukotkon Yupik people’; Allaghllak Quutmiineng Ungazimeng allgeqaq, allgellgha entaqun ayuqelghii. ‘A foreigner, he stems from the Chukotkans, from Chaplino, he arose from there, so it appears.’"	Қӯтмьӣ
quuve-	pos	IPA	to decrease in size	quuvuq ‘it became small’ /	қӯвы-
quuvyug-	pos	IPA	to feel insecure or insignificant	quuvyugtuq ‘he feels insignificant’ /	қӯвьюг-
quuyigh-	pos	IPA	for the wind to die down; to be without wind	"quuyighluni naqam anuqa kaataghaghaqluni ayuquq ‘the wind has died down, yet it gets windy frequently’; igleghtellghem tagtalngani quuyamun kaatut ‘while they were going, they suddenly got to a place where there was no wind’"	қӯӥиӷ-
quveghta	pos	IPA	cataract in eye	No information given.	қувыҳта
quvegsi	pos	IPA	wild rhubarb-like plant (Polygonum tripterocarpum) that grows in Chukotka	No information given.	қувыхси
Quvegsilek	pos	IPA	Koovukseluk Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	"literally, ‘one with quvegsi (Polygonum tripterocarpum) ‘, a plant which is found in Chukotka only (according to botanists)"	Қувыхсилык
quvluuki-	pos	IPA	to crumple up (garment or the like)	"aatkani aghipaghllaget mataghqughluki taaggun quvluukiluki unisimakangi ‘she took off her wet clothes, crumpled them up, and just left them there’"	қувлӯки-
Quwatak	pos	IPA	Bunnell Cape on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Қуӱатак
quya-	pos	IPA	to be happy; to be joyous	quyaaq ‘he was happy’ /	қуя-
quyake-	pos	IPA	to be happy about	quyakaa ‘he is happy about it or her’ /	қуякы-
quyanagh-	pos	IPA	to cause happiness	No information given.	қуянаӷ-
quyanaghhalek	pos	IPA	what a happy occurrence!	particle	қуянаҳалык
quyanaq	pos	IPA	cause of happiness	No information given.	қуянақ
quyanatun	pos	IPA	happily; fortunately; causing joy	particle	қуянатун
quyiite-	pos	IPA	"to be self-assured, self-confident, unafraid"	No information given.	қуӥӣты-
Quyillegqaatfik	pos	IPA	time in the fall when Eskimos go to the Chukchi to trade; around late August or early September	Chukotkan (R)	Қуӥильыхқāтфик
quyillegtaq	pos	IPA	knee-high men’s sealskin boot	No information given.	қуӥильыхтақ
quyillegti-	pos	IPA	to speak Chukchi; to pack things on the back in a certain (Chukchi style) way	quyillegtikayuguziin? ‘can you speak Chukchi?’; saghyat quyillegtiluki akagumi ‘he packed the equipment in the Chukchi way on his back’	қуӥильыхти-
Quyillek	pos	IPA	Chukchi; reindeer-owning (wealthy) Chukchi	Quyillget ‘Chukchis’	Қуӥильык
quyillgaaghti-	pos	IPA	to speak Chukchi	quyillgaaghtiiq ‘he’s speaking Chukchi’	қуӥильхāҳти-
Quyillgaaq	pos	IPA	non reindeer-owning (generally poor) Chukchi	"Quyillgaaghtiiq ‘he’s speaking Chukchi’; Sighinek aangepiglleghii nunaaghat esnaghmiit. Iwernga nunaaghmi kiyaghtaqut Yupigetlu, Quyngillgaatlu. ‘Sireniki is a very large settlement of coast dwelling people. However, in the settlement both Yupiks and Chukchis live.’ (AANGHHAQ 152)"	Қуӥильхāқ
quyngighniigh-	pos	IPA	to herd reindeer	No information given.	қуӥңиӷнӣӷ-
quyngighniighta	pos	IPA	reindeer herder	No information given.	қуӥңиӷнӣҳта
quyngighqwaagh-	pos	IPA	to herd reindeer	No information given.	қуӥңиҳқӱāӷ-
quyngighqwaaghta	pos	IPA	reindeer herder	No information given.	қуӥңиҳқӱāҳта
quyngighqwaaq	pos	IPA	reindeer herder; Savoonga resident	"Quyngighqwaaghet ‘Savoonga people’ (so called, formerly, since Savoonga was founded as a reindeer herding settlement)"	қуӥңиҳқӱāқ
quyngilegti-	pos	IPA	to travel by reindeer-pulled sled	"Quunpeng quyngilegtimeng ayuqsalghiikut, qimugsighpenaamta. ‘We always traveled with reindeer-teams, never dogteams.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:76)"	қуӥңильыхти-
Quyngim Qalghighviga	pos	IPA	September	"Chukotkan; literally, ‘time when the reindeer issues its cry’; also listed in various sources as August-September, and October"	Қуӥңим Қалӷиӷвига
quyngiq	pos	IPA	reindeer	"Iimnanguq. Quyillgennguq quyngightupiglleghiit ama mengteghaghtuqat. ‘It happened once, they say. There were, it is said, Chukchis who had lots of reindeer and houses.’ (MATERIALY 234); cf. qerenga"	қуӥңиқ
quyngivak	pos	IPA	moose (Alces alces)	Chukotkan	қуӥңивак
quyugh-	pos	IPA	to feel intimidated; to cower; to feel overwhelmed by a more powerful person	quyughtuq ‘he felt intimidated’ / quyughtaa ‘he intimidated him’	қуюӷ-
quyughnaq	pos	IPA	intimidating person	No information given.	қуюӷнақ
Quyutaq	pos	IPA	site near Krasivaya Mt. between Imtuk and Angetequq in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Қуютақ
raarwik	pos	IPA	underpants	this is a dual	рāрӱик
ragigu-	pos	IPA	to set up camp while traveling	qamilgut alla ragiwaaquneng qamiyeteng pinighsaghlleqiit ‘the travelers will fix their sleds next time they set up camp’	рагигу-
rakanga	pos	IPA	nomadic reindeer herders which only a shaman can see them	No information given.	ракаңа
ramkae	pos	IPA	clan; ethnic group; people; family	"ramka qafsina Sivuqameta? ‘how many clans are there on St. Lawrence Is.?’; ramket uglaghtut Sivuqamelnguut ‘there are many clans on St. Lawrence Is.’; also plural, ramket, even for one clan; ramket taakut pikaat ‘he belongs to that clan’; Ramkem aaptaqaa ellnga, “Nateta elpek naan?” ‘People were asking her, “Where is your mother?”’ (YUP. ULUNG. 2:86); Nunam ramkengi pillugutullequt, …. ‘The peoples of the world will fight each other (nation will rise up against nation), ….’ (Mark 13.8); see laluramka ‘white person’"	рамкаы
ranmae	pos	IPA	"inside wall of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	ранмаы
ranmegu	pos	IPA	"ground floor of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	ранмыгу
ranmiwitalghii	pos	IPA	one who is greedy; one who begs for things without need	No information given.	ранмиӱиталӷӣ
rapa	pos	IPA	rubber; rubber band	#NAME?	рапа
ratamae	pos	IPA	winter canvas roof	Chukotkan	ратамаы
ratamiiraq	pos	IPA	parka or overalls of reindeer skin	"also used in the dual, ratamiirak, for one such garment"	ратамӣрақ
ratamyaag-	pos	IPA	to put on waterproof summer boots	ratamyaagluni aga igleghtuq’ he put his summer waterproof boots on and went out’	ратамья̄г-
ratamyaak	pos	IPA	knee-high summer boot of waterproof sealskin with hair in	No information given.	ратамья̄к
ratanngaawen	pos	IPA	probably; likely	particle; ratanngaawen ellmaaragtekan aghvengellequt ‘probably they will catch a whale when the weather improves’	ратанңāӱын
rava	pos	IPA	rubber	"Chukotkan (R, V&E); Tawani-llu 1783 uksumi, France-mi liisimalghii(m) Sarl(em) ulimamaa alla ghhuuqaq, suul’kemeng qiipaghaghmeng, ilakelghii ravameng. ‘Then in the winter of 1783 in France the learned man Sarl made another balloon out of silk fabrik, partly rubber.’ (NATEN YUUK 6); = rapa"	рава
rawelingae	pos	IPA	squirrel	"Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined; apparently this is a different type of squirrel than sikik, perhaps, ‘tree squirrel’"	раӱылиңаы
reghange-	pos	IPA	for it to start to get dark earlier	"reghangeqestaqan iqalluk igleghllequq ‘when it starts to get dark earlier, the fish will start heading out’; reghangneghsighaqaat nunaaghmeggnun pinaluteng ‘they are waiting for it to start to get dark earlear so they can go to their camp’"	рыӷаңы-
reghete-	pos	IPA	to peek in or out; to look through a small hole or crack or from behind something	reghetuq ‘he is peeking’; reghetaa ‘he is peeking at him’ / 	рыӷыты-
reghigh-	pos	IPA	to open partially; to pry up or open partially; to wake up	reghightuq ‘it opened a crack’ / reghighaa ‘he opened it a crack’	рыӷиӷ-
reghighqe-	pos	IPA	to open wide; to break down (wall or the like) to make an opening	No information given.	рыӷиҳқы-
reghilleq	pos	IPA	hole (accidentally made)	reghilleghqun ‘through a hole’	рыӷильық
reghireghiiq	pos	IPA	thing that has lots of holes	qenungiitam asingi reghireghiightuqat ‘a brash ice scoop’s bottom has a lot of holes’	рыӷирыӷӣқ
regla-/regle-	pos	IPA	to be nosy; to be curious; to be inquisitive	"base of form used where suffix begins with a consonant, rather than a vowel, is regre-; Neghsat reglengut, iwernga riistunghuut. Regleliqaqut neghsat wetku yakughniinneghani. ‘Seals become curious, but they are sly. Seals do get curious but only when they aren’t in danger.’ (AANGHHAQ 68); = legra-, regra-"	рыгля- рыглы-
regra- / regre-	pos	IPA	to be nosy; to be curious; to be inquisitive	"regraaq ‘he was being nosy, was snooping’ / base of form used where suffix begins with a consonant, rather than a vowel, is regre-: regretkaa ‘he was nosy about it, snooped into it’; regrefqaavek ‘don't be nosy!’; = legla-, regla-"	рыгра- рыпры-
rekelta	pos	IPA	"long strap which is used to tighten roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	Chukotkan (R)	рыкыльта
repa	pos	IPA	hammer	No information given.	рыпа
repa-	pos	IPA	to hit with a hammer; to hammer	"repaa ‘he hit it with a hammer, he hammered at it’ /"	рыпа-
repall	pos	IPA	as a result of strong force; consequently; so much so that	"particle; anuqlighllagluni repall saghyat tengqaataqii ‘because it was very windy the things got blown away’; eslallughughteghllagluni repall naayvaq uleveghllagtuq ‘when it rained so hard it caused the lake to overflow’; qesightem angtalanganeng repall aatkii aghighllagtut ‘he was sweating so much that his clothes were soaking wet’; Yugem piniqeghllagem angtalanganeng kelengakeghllak aghulaqnayukan. Aanulluku repall manughamun quyngiighsan napaqaghrugllagkun petgluku esqakmantestaqegkanga. ‘The man loved him so much that he kept watch over him in case he went away. He even brought him outside in the yard and tied him with the reindeer lasso on a pole and watched him.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:13); Amsaanaanghani seghleghwaaghuut taawa. Puyuq aanegpenani mingiteghllaneghmini repall aneghsiilliqnaghlluni ayuquq. ‘When it is calm, it is terrible. The soot doesn’t go out, and when it is scattered all around (the house) consequently it is like the place is full of cinders.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:83); Kaamgek naatghighquullutek, repall ununghagu itegii kumlaqughaqegkangi. ‘His boot soles were worn out, so much so that at night his feet would be cold.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 44)"	рыпаль
repangwaaq	pos	IPA	standard carpenter's hammer	No information given.	рыпаңӱāқ
repaqu-	pos	IPA	to hammer repeatedly	No information given.	рыпақу-
reqiiwmete-	pos	IPA	to be bent; to be distorted	iighwilnguq quupaghlluni reqiiwmellghani uqlightaqeftuq ‘he was watching out for seal at the bend where a piece of the sea ice had broken away’; ivenruutem salngagkek reqiiwmelnguuk pegnem nallghusaamakek ‘he had a hard time fixing and straightening the distorted motor well in the boat’	рықӣӱмыты-
resinugatae	pos	IPA	buckle of belt	#NAME?	рысинугатаы
retwha-	pos	IPA	to bombard with artillery	retwhaaq ‘he bombarded something’; retwhaa ‘he bombarded it’ /	рытӱа-
retwhan	pos	IPA	cannon; big gun; artillery piece	No information given.	рытӱан
retwhaqu-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly bombard	No information given.	рытӱақу-
riiggni-	pos	IPA	to make a den (of an animal)	riiggniiq ‘it made a den’; riignii ‘it made a den in it’ / saghligaq aqsalek riiggniluni ighnimalghii ‘the female dog made a den and gave birth’; siqlugaq sikigem riiggnimaa ‘a squirrel made a den in the underground meat cache’	рӣхньи-
riighnak	pos	IPA	edible seashore life type	exact identification undetermined; cf. riiq	рӣӷнак
riiglluk	pos	IPA	artemesia or wormwood (Artemesia sp.)	No information given.	рӣхльюк
riigsi-	pos	IPA	to make a den (of an animal)	kaviiq riigsimaaq naayvam akingakun ‘a fox made a den on the south side of the lake’	рӣхси-
riigta	pos	IPA	den; lair	Esghaamakagna sikik riigtemineng aanluni navek pangalelghii.  Nalughqaghsimalghii riigtengan manungakun. ‘He saw squirrel running out from her den. He landed in front of her den.’ (KALLAG. 89)	рӣхта
riiq	pos	IPA	earwax	riighightuq ‘he removed his earwax’; riightuuq ‘he has lots of earwax’	рӣқ
riirngi-	pos	IPA	to watch stealthily; to observe; to spy on	riirngiiq ‘he's stealthily watching’; riirngii ‘he's stealthily watching her’ / riirngilleqaa ‘he will spy on her’; riirngivalluq ‘one who spies on people’; riirngista ‘a spy’	рӣрңи-
riirvak	pos	IPA	"one who has grown, started to reason and learned a lot; mature person"	"nalluneqsugluni aleni enankin riirvak ellmineng igleghutisqumakanga ‘he wasn’t sure, but he let his partner who was a mature person go on his own’"	рирвак
riistu-	pos	IPA	to be sly; to be stingy	"riistuuq ‘he/it is sly’, ‘he is stingy’ / "	рӣсту-
riistuneq	pos	IPA	parsimonious person; stingy person; sly person or animal	Riistuneq Kaviiq ‘The Sly Fox’ (AANGHHAQ 34)	рӣстунық
riistuniqe-	pos	IPA	to be frugal; to be overly parsimonious; to be stingy; to be very sly or sneaky	"riistuniquq ‘he doesn't care to part with what he has feeling he may run out’ / riistuniqutkaa ‘he is parsimonious with it’; Ii naqam riistuniqumaghma aghyuughnayukangatnga. ‘I did this [hid] in as much as I, being very sneaky , thought that might scold me.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)"	рӣстуниқы-
rinimiwi-	pos	IPA	to be a hoarder	cf. rinmiwi-	ринимиӱи-
rinmiwi-	pos	IPA	to beg	Chukotkan (R); aghnalqwaaq rinmiwiiquq pilgughngaaghmi neqmeng ilangitnun tungsighniighaquq ‘the old lady is begging for food from others even though she has some’; cf. rinimiwi-	ринмиӱи-
ripalquulgek	pos	IPA	Chukchi cargo sled pulled by reindeer	Chukotkan (R); this is a dual	рипальқӯлгык
risinugatae	pos	IPA	buckle of belt	#NAME?	рисинугатаы
risqetkuq	pos	IPA	woman’s knee-high boot made from suede	Chukotkan (R)	рисқыткуқ
rugell	pos	IPA	possibly	"particle; aamna nuugllaguniiqaat rugell unangsaallequt ‘they say that there are lots of seals in the ocean on the other side of the mountains, and so they would possibly catch a lot there’; rugell kaaskuni atuqiinaghnakek ‘he could possibly be able to use it when he arrives’"	ругыль
Rultangiq	pos	IPA	Orion (constellation)	No information given.	Рультаңиқ
Rutwhan	pos	IPA	site near mouth of Tkachen Bay in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Путхӱан
ruughangi-	pos	IPA	to not hesitate to do or say something; to be outspoken 	sariighmun ilataqelghii ruughangitutmineng ‘he joins into activities due to his never being hesitant to do things’	рӯӷаңи-
Ruuseghmii	pos	IPA	Russian	sometimes also used for ChukotkanYupik person as opposed to St. Lawrence Is. Yupik person; Ruuseghmiistun ‘in the Russian language’ or ‘following Russian ways’	Рӯсыӷмӣ
Ruuseghmiik	pos	IPA	river that flows into Tomname Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Рӯсыӷмӣк
ruwelam	pos	IPA	for the best	"particle; puwelam mughutegpenang, luuraq iikulleqaaten ‘for the best, don’t go hunting, the ice might break off (while you’re out there)’"	руӱылям
sa	pos	IPA	what?; something; relative (kin)	"sameng piyugsin? ‘what do you want?’; sanguzin? ‘what are you?’; sa tamaghhaan ‘everything’; savut ‘our relative’, ‘our thing(s)’; relative case is saam (rather than *sam); the expanded base sangaa- (underlyingly sangau-) rather than sangu- is used for asking what something (3rd person) is; thus: sangaawa? ‘what is it?’; cf. sangwaa"	ся
sa-	pos	IPA	to do what?; to do something	"saa? ‘what did he do?’; aatkaghten saat aghvingisafki ‘what happened to your clothes when you didn’t wash them?; ayveq saa guusavgu? ‘what did the walrus do when you shot it?’; saaqat? ‘what’s going on?, what are they doing?’"	ся-
saa	pos	IPA	I don't know; it doesn't register in my mind; never mind	"particle; this exclamation is often pronounced with vowel as in English ""hat""; = saami"	ся̄
saafqughwaagh-	pos	IPA	to run one’s or fingers hand over (it); to feel around	aghnalqwaaghhaam ayaakam eltughani saafqughwaaghaa angtalanga esghaghnaluku ‘the little old blind lady ran her hands over her grandchild to determine how tall he was’	ся̄фқуӷӱāӷ-
saafte-	pos	IPA	to touch; to feel	saaftuq ‘he touched something or touched himself’; saaftaa ‘he touched it’ /	ся̄фты-
saag-	pos	IPA	to get scattered; to get into disarray; to get spread out; to uncoil	"saagtuq or saagaa ‘it is in disarray’ / saagtaa ‘he spread it out, uncoiled it, scattered it’; saagngaaq ‘it is spread out’"	ся̄г-
saagaghte-	pos	IPA	to suddenly unroll or otherwise spread out	saagaghtuq ‘it suddenly unrolled’	ся̄гаҳты-
saaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to suddenly happen	usually an event than causes concern	ся̄ӷаҳты-
saaghw-	pos	IPA	area or space right next to something	look under saaqw	ся̄ӱӷ-
saagmete-	pos	IPA	"to be level, smooth, flat"	No information given.	сāгмыты-
saagraasiq	pos	IPA	iron for pressing clothes	"used in the dual, saagraasik, for one iron"	ся̄грāсиқ
saagragh-	pos	IPA	to uncoil; to smooth out; to spread out	No information given.	ся̄граӷ-
saagrugaaq	pos	IPA	"solid ice surface, not so smooth, but good for traveling"	see item 60 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ся̄гругāқ
saagsaate-	pos	IPA	to break its harness (of a dog)	"maghyaghqughteka saagsaalluni aghulaquq, sivulimnun malighqaatuq ‘my lead dog broke its harness and went on up to the team ahead of me’"	сāхсāты-
saagsiqu	pos	IPA	slush ice seen just below the surface of the water looking like streaks of oil in the water; greasy ice	cf. saag-; see item 61 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ся̄хсиқу
saagta	pos	IPA	gangline and harness of dogteam	No information given.	ся̄хта
saagvineq	pos	IPA	plain; broad flat valley	Chukotka (R)	ся̄гвинық
saalghaghta	pos	IPA	unexpected storm coming from any direction	No information given.	ся̄лӷаҳта
saallgaghte-	pos	IPA	to scrape off accidently 	uguqelleni saallgaghsimaa ‘he scraped off the scab on his burn wound’; ighneghwaani saallgaghtaa kangsumqaghlluku ‘he scraped off the skin on his finger when it got stuck between two things’	сāльхаҳты-
saallghaghte-	pos	IPA	for wind to change course suddenly get strong; for a storm to arise	angyat saallghaghutevziimakangi sikumelluki ‘the boat was almost caught by a sudden storm while it was in the ice’; quutfaghmeng saallghaghtaa ‘it suddenly started to blow hard and get stormy from the north’	ся̄льҳаҳты-
saalpak	pos	IPA	lower jaw of whale	"dual, saalpagek, used for one jaw; cf. sallgaq"	ся̄льпак
saalqaaq	pos	IPA	thin new ice forming on surface of water	see item 62 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ся̄льқāқ
saam	pos	IPA	what?; something	"relative case (rather than *sam); cf. similar lengthening of vowel in yuuk ‘person’ (from base yug-), and whaa ‘right here’ (from base wha-); Saam ukavek a-a-a, kaatestaten? ‘What, eh, made you come this way?’ (AYUM. UNGIP. II:16); … amalleqa agavek nunivagmun kiyang piyugmeng piiqut metghaam saam maniganun ilangi. ‘… and others would walk to the tundra for the eggs of eiders and some (other birds). (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140)"	ся̄м
saama	pos	IPA	also; too; furthermore; moreover	"particle; joins clauses only, not nouns or noun phrases; pinaqenghitut agavek saama anuqliqanga they aren't going out over there and furthermore the wind is picking up; cf. ama1"	ся̄ма
saami	pos	IPA	I don't know; it doesn't register in my mind	particle; often pronounced with a rising and then falling intonation and with the initial syllable prolonged; = saa	ся̄мӣ
saamna	pos	IPA	that one down there; that one to the south or southwest 	"base: sam-; obscured demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: samum ‘(of) the one down there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: saamkut ‘those down there’; vocative: ‘saamyuq you, down there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tesamna or esamna ‘the one down there’; localis adverb: samani ‘in the place down there’; terminalis adverb: samavek ‘to down there’; vialis adverb: samagun or saamggun ‘through down there’; samaken or saamken ‘from down there’; interjectional: sama ‘there (down there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tesamani or esamani"	ся̄мна
saani	pos	IPA	aged food	No information given.	сāнии
saanighte-	pos	IPA	to age (of food)	neqet kiigmi saanighsugumaghtaqii ‘food easily gets aged in the summer’; … saanighruugtekestaghluuteng aa urang neqnightut neqet. ‘… then the food would be aged just right and have a special flavor to it.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:242)	сāнииҳты-
saanpipa	pos	IPA	sandpaper	also used in Chukotka	ся̄нпипа
saanqaghqe-	pos	IPA	to be face to face; to face	saanqaghqullutek yugek sameng pughiitaqeftuk ‘two men were conversing face to face’; igaghtem igaghyat sivungitgun nekevluni saanqaghqelluki apeghtughii ‘the teacher stood right in front of the students and taught them’	сāнқаҳқы-
saape-1	pos	IPA	to cover	saapuq ‘he covered himself’; saapaa ‘he covered it’ / saaputaa he put it as a cover on something’	ся̄пы-1
saape-2	pos	IPA	to drive (herd of reindeer) to a new place	"Chukotkan (R); cf. sapughagh-; quyngighqwaghtem saapumaa quyngiq esnamun ‘the reindeer herder drove the reindeer down to the coast’; uksaghyagu quyngighqwaaghtet sapughamit quyngit meghem tunganganun ‘when it became fall time, the reindeer herders drove the reindeer herd towards the ocean’"	ся̄пы-2
saapghangite-	pos	IPA	to not be detered by cold (or other adverse conditions)	"saapghangilliqnaqeneghmeng ighneghwaaghi qenwat kumlaqughyaghii ‘in as much as he didn’t let cold deter him, [he went outside and and then] his fingers did start to get frostbitten’"	сāпҳаңиты-
saaphanghilnguq*	pos	IPA	one who can withstand extreme cold	No information given.	ся̄пҳанӷилңуқ
saapkute-	pos	IPA	to escape taking some of the hunting gear (of a sea mammal)	"angyameng sivuyagtem puyguluku uyiiq awataghpighpenaan maklak naghullegluku peghqaamakanaga, ima saapkutuq ‘the man at the front of the boat forgot to attach a float to the line, so the bearded seal he had harpooned got away with the line’; cf. sapegi-"	ся̄пкуты-
saaputaq	pos	IPA	cover; lid; curtain; shade	#NAME?	ся̄путақ
saaqghaghte-	pos	IPA	to accidentally or suddenly chip	saaqghaghtuq ‘it got chipped’; saaqghaghtaa ‘he chipped it’ / = saqighaaghte-	ся̄қҳаҳты-
saaqw	pos	IPA	area or space next to or right by (it)	"saaghwani ‘right next to it’; Nekeghqughaqegkangi mangteghat, Quyillget, saaghwitni quyngit. ‘She set out the (toy) houses, the Chukchi, and next to them, the reindeer.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 68); Aqumuq meteghlluk uyghagem saaghwakun, quneghtuq. ‘The raven sat down beside the rock.’ (AANGHHAQ 28); saaghwek (dual) ‘side gore in woman’s coverals’"	ся̄ӱқ
saaqwin	pos	IPA	walrus-skin cover of  summer tent from top to bottom	Chukotkan (R)	ся̄ӱқин
saaqwliq	pos	IPA	something next to another; neighbor	"saaqwliqullutek ‘they2 are side-by-side’; saaqwliilluku ‘bringing himself to her side, or keeping it by his side’"	ся̄қӱлиқ
saarma-	pos	IPA	to depend on something	saarmaaq ‘he depends on something’ / saarmatkaa ‘he depends on it’	ся̄рма-
saasaqe-1	pos	IPA	to try to attract attention; to seek a favor	saasaquq ‘he tried to bring attention to himself’ / saasaqutagka qiipaghaagka kakiightesqellukek ‘I tried to get her to sew my cloth cover parka’	ся̄сяқы-1
saasaqe-2	pos	IPA	to put in an exposed place; to lay out	Chukotkan (R); aghikaq amiq aghnam saasaqutaqaa siqineghmun ‘the woman put the wet skin out (to dry) in the sun’	ся̄сақы-2
saasqagh-	pos	IPA	for wind to be coming straight in from the ocean; to be turned facing something	"aywaaneng Aqeftapak saasaawuq ‘the wind is coming straight in from the north at Aqeftapak’; pakfallameng uughqa uukna saaqaghtaqaa ‘the wind is coming right in from the west on the western shores of the island’; saaqami unangkamun tuwiinaghtuq ‘when wind is coming right in to land, it is easy to retrieve seals’; guygu saasqaghngaq sivumineng siqineghmun ‘the house is turned towards to the sun in the front’"	сāсқаӷ-
saasqaghmeraagh-	pos	IPA	to stay around whether appreciated or not	Chukotkan (R); cf. saasaqe-	ся̄сқаӷмырāӷ-
saasqaq	pos	IPA	wind toward land from ocean	"Kangighiinaq saasqaaghhneghmini Naayvatun whaten evlugtutkaaqelghii. ‘Only when the winds belew directly into the cove would some small swells appear, like the ones you see on Troutman Lake [by Gambell].’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:144)"	сясқақ
saatghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to wear a fur-side-in parka without a cloth cover	No information given.	ся̄тҳӱāӷ-
saatnguraaq	pos	IPA	skin mitten with fur in	Chukotkan	ся̄тңурāқ
saavgumiigh-	pos	IPA	"to prepare, get equipment ready, to harpoon the whale"	"angyam kennaqutnginaq sivuyagtet saavgumiighaqut ‘as soon as a boat launches, the striker gets the harpoon ready’; naghulkani pilghayaghluku saavgumiinqiglluni naghullgaa ‘he unsuccessfully harpooned it, and got his equipment ready again and struck it’"	сāагумӣӷ-
saaygu	pos	IPA	tunnel entrance to semi-subterranean house	No information given.	ся̄ӥгу
saayguraaq	pos	IPA	modern storm shed; entry porch	"Taaqneghmegteki, saayguraaghem qaaynganun qaakaqiit, nalighmeng siqlugam qaaynganun. ‘When they are finished with them they put them up on top of the storm shed or on the roof of the underground cache.’ (MRS. DELLA W. 6)"	ся̄ӥгурāқ
saaymiq	pos	IPA	harpoon for seals	Chukotkan (R)	ся̄ӥмиқ
saayngiitaq	pos	IPA	apron; front cover	No information given.	ся̄ӥңӣтақ
safk-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > safkaagh, safkiitaq, safkutaq, cf. saape-"	сяфк-
safkaagh-	pos	IPA	to cover; to block (view)	qergesek safkaaghqek ‘(pull the shade to) cover the window’	сяфкāӷ-
safkaaghun	pos	IPA	curtain; drape; window shade	No information given.	сяфкāӷун
safkeghyuug-	pos	IPA	to be in a bad mood; to feel frustated; to be angry	ulimasini iflakuku safkeghyuugtaqeftuq ‘he lost his carving tools and so he’s been in a bad mood’; safkeghyuugullghiik qenwat pillugusimalghiik ‘they were mad at each other so they fought’	сяфкыӷью̄г-
safkiitaq	pos	IPA	loincloth worn by men inside house in old times	No information given.	сяфкӣтақ
safkutaq	pos	IPA	cover; windscreen or other shelter from wind; barrier to view; cover-up of facts	taakwna tatek asitmun ayuqelghii safkutaawaquq taagavek esghamun ‘that ridge down there is an obstruction to a more distant view’; kangighaq tesqamna taatgek taakuk safkutak ilugkenilnguq angyanun anuqmi uqitaghviwaaquq ‘the cove in between those ridges can be used by boats as a shelter from the wind and high seas’; peghqinghutmeggneng sangwaa seghleghnaq safkutighaat nagatkaaluni piningllaqameng ‘they cleverly covered up the disgraceful event by making it sound like something respectable’	сяфкутақ
safleg-	pos	IPA	"to handle and examine permission; to ""paw""; to rummage through (it)"	saflegtuq ‘he rummaged through something’; saflegaa ‘he rumaged through it’ /	сяфльлыг-
saflengaq	pos	IPA	one who likes to handle everything without permission	No information given.	сяфльлыңақ
safte-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > safleg-, saafte-"	сяфты-
sagelmak	pos	IPA	ruddy turnstone (Arenaria interpres)	sagelmagyagaa kiigmi whani ‘there are lots of turnstones this summer’; sagelmagyaget esghaamakangit ‘they had seen a lot of turnstones’	сягылмак
sageyengestaq	pos	IPA	"small drum, hoop, drum-like or hoop-like thing"	"such as a the ring on a mast used to raise the sails, or the basket on a ski pole"	сягыӥыңыстақ
saghefte-	pos	IPA	to anger	sagheftaa ‘he made her angry’; saghefluku aanuq ‘making her angry he left’; cf. sagheve-	сяӷыфты-
sagheme-	pos	IPA	to be very envious	No information given.	сяӷымы-
sagheve-	pos	IPA	to crumble; to topple; to collapse	saghevuq ‘it crumbled’ / sagheftaa ‘he crumbled it’; qenaaq mayughlluku mangteghangllaqaqa esnami saghevuq ‘the sand castle I made on the beach collapsed’; cf. saqeme-	сяӷывы-
saghevleghwaaq	pos	IPA	granulated sugar	Chukotkan (R); granulated sugar	сяӷывлыӷӱāқ
saghiigha-	pos	IPA	astonished; amazed	"emotional root; saghiighayugtuq ‘he was astonished, amazed, shocked, etc.’ saghiighanaghtuq ‘it is astonishing, amazing’; saghiighakaa ‘he feels astonished at it’; saghiighayugtuq elngaatall esghaghluku sikumi ukimalleq aniguvzeghaam saapegkaa esneghruggaakun qimugsighluni naghughtekani mamlegmi ighivgaq ‘he is in a state of shock seeing how the snow concealed the sea ice hole which he narrowly missed with his dogteam in the dark last night’; Saghiighayugllaget, allaaghlluwhaghyugllaget, ""Aagkut sukatepigtat!"" ‘In utter astonishment [they said], “How fast that boat is going by!”’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:228); cf. saghiighqe-"	сяӷӣӷа-
saghiighqe-	pos	IPA	to be enthusiastic; to act intensely	saghiighquq ‘he is acting intensely’ / anuqem saghiighqutaa tengegkayuggaq tengaamaluku ‘the wind was intensely affecting the little plane which was flying’; ulimaani sahgiighqutaa ‘he’s really putting effort into his carving’; cf. saghiigha-	сяӷӣҳқы-
saghligaq	pos	IPA	bitch; female dog; female quadruped	No information given.	сяӷлигақ
saghna-	pos	IPA	to gather; to pick up (many thing); to collect	saghnaaq ‘he gathered things’; saghnii ‘he gathered them’ / sungaat ifkaquusata saghnii segesqughlluni ‘when the beads fell and scattered he knelt down and picked them up’; vegmeng saghnaaq ‘he gathered some grass’	сяӷна-
saghnasitaq	pos	IPA	small container for gathered things (such as berries)	No information given.	сяӷнаситақ
saghnasta	pos	IPA	collector	ayumiim naangqughlluganun taakut saghnastet kaasimaat ‘those collectors of old ivory have arrived’	сяӷнаста
saghu-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > saghumik, saghuya"	сяӷу-
saghumigneq	pos	IPA	left side	amigem saghumigneghanituq ‘it is to the left of the door’	сяӷумигнық
saghumik	pos	IPA	left handed person	No information given.	сяӷумик
saghuya	pos	IPA	left hand	saghuyagmineng igaghaquq ‘he writes with his left hand’	сяӷуя
saghya	pos	IPA	thing; object; household goods; supplies; possession	saghyatuut ‘they have lots of possessions’; saghyat kaatut ‘the supplies have arrived’; cf. sa	сяӷья
saghyughte-	pos	IPA	to get lots	cf. saghna-; estugaghlluni saghyughtuq ‘she went to the store and got lots of stuff’	сяӷьюҳты-
sagiqe-	pos	IPA	to persist; to persevere; to insist; to urge on	sagiquq ‘he is persisting in his activity’ / sagiqutkaa ‘he is persisting in his actions on it’; yuuk tughumghanaluku sagiqutaa ‘he insisted on wrestling with the man’	сягиқы-
sagiqneq	pos	IPA	"persistent, persevering, responsible person"	No information given.	сягиқньық
saglighaq	pos	IPA	large flat rock	"naayghamun unataghyat sagligham qaayngani angyaataghqumalghiit ‘those who went to the mountain to pick greens, ate their snacks on top of a large flat rock’"	сяглиӷақ
sagneq	pos	IPA	pot; pan; food container; dish; bowl	"may be used in the dual, sagneghek, for one bowl; = segneq, signeq"	сягнық
"sagniin, sagniita"	pos	IPA	twine sewn in along stitches of sole of skin-boot to keep the thread from cutting into the skin	No information given.	"сягнӣн, сагнӣта"
saguulnga	pos	IPA	low table or tray for tea; coffee table	#NAME?	сягӯлңа
saguyaaghte-	pos	IPA	to turn when traveling; to take a side trip	"piyaa sikugni igleghteghngaaghmi yuuk esghaghluku saguyaaghfikaa ‘when the man was hunting on the ice and saw a person, he turned and went towards him’; angyat taglaghngaaghmeng saguyaaghtut ugatmun ‘when the boat was going towards land, they suddenly turned northwest’; cf. saguyaq"	сягуя̄ҳты-
saguyaghalek	pos	IPA	the planet Saturn	"literally, ‘one with something like a drum’, in reference to Saturn’s rings"	сягуя̄ӷалык
saguyaghtaagh-	pos	IPA	to prepare a skin drum for use (as by moistening its skin)	No information given.	сягуяҳтāӷ-
saguyaq	pos	IPA	Eskimo skin drum	"also used in the dual, saguyak, used for one drum; Nanevgaghllagem nuliini pimakanga, ""Aghnalqwaay, enta saguyagka tagivaghqek!"" ‘The old man said to his wife, “Old woman, hand me my drum!”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 22)"	сягуяқ
sakegh-	pos	IPA	to cut in one stroke; to slash	savikegtam ayveghem mangunanga kaapluku sakeghyaqminigu iwerngaqun tukughaanun ‘a person with a very good knife put his knife to the skin of the walrus and just slit it down to the foot flipper joint in one stroke’	сякыӷ-
sakelghaaq	pos	IPA	junk; trash; odds and ends; knick-knack	No information given.	сякылӷāқ
sakemna	pos	IPA	that one down there; that one to the west; that one in the outer room; that one toward Gambell from Savoonga; that one towards east (additional meaning in Chukotka)	"base: sakm-; obscured demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: sakmum ‘(of) the one out there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: sakemkut ‘those out there’; vocative: sakemyuq ‘you, out there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: tesakemna or esakemna ‘that one out there’; localis adverb: sakmani ‘at the place out there’, ‘Gambell from Savoonga’, ‘in the west’; terminalis adverb: sakmavek ‘to out there’, ‘to Gambell from Savooonga’, ‘westward’; vialis adverb: sakmagun ‘through out there’, etc.; ablative adverb: sakmaken ‘from out there’, etc.; interjectional: sakma ‘(it is) there (out there)!’, etc.; anaphoric localis adverb: tesakmani or esakmani ‘there, out there’, etc."	сякымна
sakemruwaaq	pos	IPA	a variety of desirable things; luxuries; delicacies	paper sack-a allaaghhiinaghmeng sakemruwaaghmeng imighluku tuunumakanga ‘she filled a paper sack of all kinds of desirable stuff (foods) and gave it to her’	сякымруӱāқ
sakenge-	pos	IPA	to catch fish or game; to get something; to buy something	sakenguq ‘he caught or got something’	сякыңы-
sakeqe-	pos	IPA	"to break in two (of rope, string, thread, wire, tape, etc.)"	sakequq ‘it broke in two’; sakeqaa ‘he broke it in in two’ / sungaanka sakequt ‘my beaded necklace broke’; sakeqngaaq ‘it is broken’; sakeqaghaghtuq ‘it broke suddenly (as from being stretched)’	сякықы-
sakete-	pos	IPA	to make thinner	No information given.	сякыты-
saki	pos	IPA	father-in-law; mother-in-law; parent of one's spouse; inlaw	sakinka ‘my inlaws’	сяки
sakighaq*	pos	IPA	man's wife's brother; brother-in-law (in this one limited sense)	No information given.	сякиӷақ
sakighneq	pos	IPA	row of things or people	No information given.	сякиӷнық
sakighte-	pos	IPA	to line up side by side	sakightut ‘they lined up side by side’; sakightii ‘he lined them up’ / choir-et yugit sakightut ‘the choir members lined up side by side’; igaqistem igaqsaghqat yuget sakightestii ‘the photographer lined up the people whose picture he was going to take’	сякиҳты-
sakiiq	pos	IPA	woman's husband's sister; sister-in-law (in this one limited sense)	No information given.	сякӣқ
sakimak	pos	IPA	chest (anatomical)	"also plural, sakimaget, for one person's chest; sakimagenka ‘my chest’"	сякимак
sakniqe-	pos	IPA	to exert oneself; to be forceful; to yearn for something; to be forceful; to be anxious	sakniquq ‘he is exerting himself’ / sakniqutaa ‘he is exerting himself over it’; sakniqutaat qamuqaghteng uqightuqaq ‘they are putting a lot of effort into pulling that heavy thing’; mekelghiighhaq sakniqnguuq elngaatall snow-machine-engnaluni ‘the little boy really wants to get a snow machine’; peng’gem sakniqestaa aghnaq qayughllak ighneghii aga anuqataghaghmi imana kellaatalghiit ‘the woman is very anxious and worried because her sons have gone out on a boat when it is very windy’; imaghllugem sakniqestii angyat ‘the sea swells were really rocking the boat’	сякнниқы-
sakraa-	pos	IPA	to be frustrated; to be irritated; to be in a bad mood	sakraaguq ‘he is frustrated’	сякшā-
sakrite-	pos	IPA	to be frustrated; to get irritated	sakrituq ‘he is frustrated’ /  qenwat sakrituq mekelngiighhaq anengaan qinuyuglluku ‘finally the little boy became irritated after his brother provoked him’	сякшиты-
sakusiiqe-	pos	IPA	to use in a careless and wasteful manner; to abuse; to mistreat; to oudo in sports	sangwaat atughqat sakusiiqigatiit ‘they don’t use useful things in a wasteful and careless manner’; ghuuni sakusiiqepagluki ghhuughiitqaghsimalghii ‘he wastefully used his ammunition so he ran out’; uyughani sakusiiqaa ‘she mistreated her younger brother’; kilgaaqumi aleni sakusiiqaa ‘he really outran his companion in a loong distance footrace’	сякусӣқы-
sakwaalghutaq	pos	IPA	trash container; waste basket; dumpster	No information given.	сякӱāлӷутақ
sakwaaq	pos	IPA	junk; worthless thing; lowly person; old worthless foodstuff	No information given.	сякӱāқ
sakwaaqe-	pos	IPA	to treat as junk; to be careless with; to handle roughly; to look down on (a person); to outdo in an athletic contest	temngi sakwaaqlaataghaak aynganangakenghhagni qapragteghllak quunpeng ‘as usual he is being careless with his new record player treating it roughly all the time’; kilgaaqulluteng ataasim yugem ilani elngaatall sakwaaqii ‘during the race one man really outdid the rest of the men’	сякӱāқы-
salagu-	pos	IPA	to club; to clobber; to hit with something thrown	yugem neghsaq salaguyaqminigu tuqutaa ‘when the man clobbered the seal he killed it’	сялягу-
salanta	pos	IPA	cylinder	usually refers to the cylinder of an engine	сялянта
salghaaq1	pos	IPA	sickness (especially the flu or the like)	salghaaq qaga piniqaat ‘they say there is a sickness going around out there’; salghaaq akmaken kaatulluku mingituq ‘sickness came in from mainland and is spreading’	сялӷāқ1
salghaaq2	pos	IPA	useless thing; garbage	salghaaq tamana qerngughlluku eggnaken ‘get all the useless items together and throw them away’	сялӷāқ2
Salghaat	pos	IPA	Salghat Beach on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Сялӷāт
salghutaq	pos	IPA	pantry; storage place	No information given.	сялӷутақ
salin	pos	IPA	still; not yet	particle; salin aviitaqaa? ‘is he still not here?’; salin mekestaaghhaalunga tawansaghtunga ‘when I was still small I was there’; angyat salin aviitutaqut ‘the boats are still gone’; kaasigataat? ‘have they arrived?’ -- salin ‘not yet’	сялин
sallagte-	pos	IPA	"to clean in a rough, partial or preliminary way (e.g. a skin)"	sallagtuq ‘he cleaned something’; sallagtaa ‘he cleaned it’ / amiiraq sallagtaa sivukluku aghvigvagilgamigu ‘she gave the skin a preliminary cleaning before washing it’; cf. sallegte-	сяльяхты-
sallaqi-	pos	IPA	to have a comfortable life; to relax; to take it easy; to have time and opportunity to socialize	"sallaqiiq ‘he is at ease’ / kaviighhaq sallaqiighwaghaqeftuq siqineghllugmi ‘the little fox was taking it easy, sunning himself’; qerngughqullghiinun yuuk sallaqiiq ‘the man had the time and opportunity to mingle with the people in the crowd’; sallaqingigalnguq ‘one who cannot leave home to socialize (often with an implication of illness)’"	сяльяқи-
salleghte-	pos	IPA	to leave (after difficulty); to move forward	angyaghteng pegnem saallghutaat ‘they finally but just barely got their boat moving’; nutaan nemineng salleghtuq qinuyugutmineng ‘he finally left his house after being sick’	сяльыҳты-
sallegpak	pos	IPA	"consolidated slush ice or new ice thin not quite thick enough to be safely walked on, can be broken up by the passage of a boat"	see item 63 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сяльыхпак
sallegte-	pos	IPA	to scrape (especially fat from a skin)	"sallegtaa ‘she scraped it’ / saallgaghtaa kililleghmi qaltenga ‘he accidently scraped the scab off his wound’; = salligte-cf. sallagte-, sata1"	сяльыхты-
sallek1	pos	IPA	slush ice becoming consolidated; new ice not thick enough to walk on forming on calm water	saallguuq ‘it is slush ice becoming consolidated’; see item 64 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сяльык1
sallek2	pos	IPA	capable person; expert	"from the ""empty base"", sa-, which is ""stress-repelling"" (see Jacobson  1984b) so that the a does not lengthen during suffixation: sallguuq ‘he is a capable person’"	сяльык2
sallgaaq	pos	IPA	"slush ice area just beginning to consolidate, after the qenu stage"	No information given.	сяльхāқ
sallgaq	pos	IPA	lower jaw of whale	"used in the dual, sallgak, for one jaw; cf. saalpak"	сяльхақ
sallghite-	pos	IPA	to be unbleminshed; to not have done anything	"sallghitnghwaaq ‘somehthing that is whole, intact, unmarred’; sallghwaaghhiituq ‘it is in very good condition’"	сяльҳиты-
sallghwaaghhiite-	pos	IPA	to be in perfect condition	tiintaviget sallghwaaghhiitut ‘the tenting grounds are in perfect conditions’; naalkusimalghii taghnughhaghwaaghmeng sallghwaaghhiilngughmeng ‘he found a ivory doll artifact that was in perfect condition’	сяльҳӱāҳӣты-
salligte-	pos	IPA	to scrape (especially fat from a skin)	"= sallegte-cf. sallagte-, sata1"	сяльихты-
salliigh-	pos	IPA	to travel through slush ice by boat	"angyat taan’ga salliighaqut ‘the boat out there is travelling through slush ice’; salliighem tagtalangani qenwat amigket ukimalghiik ‘in the midst of travelling through the slush ice, the skin on their boat finally developed a hole’"	сяльӣӷ-
sallmag- 	pos	IPA	to patch a boot sole	sallmagaa ‘he patched it’ /	сяльмьаг-
sallmak	pos	IPA	patch on boot sole	No information given.	сяльмьак
sallmeg-	pos	IPA	to scrape one's skin accidently; to scrape the paint off something	No information given.	сяльмьыг-
sallughmete-	pos	IPA	to be cross-eyed; to be wall-eyed	Chukotkan (R); sallughmelnguq ‘one who is cross-eyed or wall-eyed’	сяльюӷмыты-
salngak	pos	IPA	box; suitcase; motor well in boat; coffin	"used in the dual, salngagek, for one box, motor well, etc.; salngagegka ‘my suitcase’"	сялңак
salngawrak	pos	IPA	empty box or container	Chukotkan (R)	сялңаӱрак
salug-	pos	IPA	to be in desperate need of water to drink; to be dying of thirst	salugtuq ‘he is dying of thirst’	сялюг-
samataq	pos	IPA	forehead ornament of iron given by shaman to patient as a remedy	No information given.	сяматақ
sameghqe-	pos	IPA	to die without a trace due to an accident; to have a fatal accident away from a settlement	Esneghak teskiwhkuk sameghqutkegkaaniiqagket ‘the Esneghak channel is said to have claimed lives’; angyaghllugluteng sameghqumalghiit ‘they went on a make-shift boat and had a tragedy’	сямыҳқы-
samillagh-	pos	IPA	to unsuccessfully do something (especially in hunting)	"nunavaget uyatiilluki samillaqanghitiit ‘they approached a herd of walrus on the ice, but they didn’t get to them’; aghveq puneglluku talwa samillanghituq ‘he struck with an explosive at the whale, but the bomb didn’t go off’"	сямильяӷ-
samitagh-	pos	IPA	to sneak up on	Chukotkan (V&E)	сямитаӷ-
samleghagh-	pos	IPA	to be active	(?)	сямлыӷаӷ-
samlleghqe-	pos	IPA	to scratch; to abrade	Chuktokan (R); samlleghqaa ‘she scratched him’	сямльыҳқы-
samseghhaghaq	pos	IPA	black guillemot (Cephus grylle)	No information given.	сямсыҳаӷақ
samuwaq	pos	IPA	samovar	No information given.	сямуӱақ
sanaghte-	pos	IPA	to process a skin; to cure a skin; to tan a skin	sanaghtaa ‘he processed it’ / sanaghtiiq ‘he processed a skin or skins’	сянаҳты-
sanamaqute-	pos	IPA	to prepare something; to get something ready	"aghnam avaqutani neqmeng sanamaqutaqii neghesqelluki ‘the woman prepares food for her children so they can eat’; sanamaqunnaqamken enan taqmiighnaken ‘I’m going to get it ready for you, so you finish it’"	сянамақуты-
sanariigh-	pos	IPA	to procrastinate	"sanariighinaamalunga qenwat whaten lliighaa ‘I’ve been procrastinating, and now it’s gotten this late’; qinuketiqem sanariilghii uveglluku piyaqlegestun ‘he should’ve done it earlier, but he was procrastinating due to lack of interest in it’"	сянарӣӷ-
"sanepuuta, sanepuun"	pos	IPA	lowerable keel of a boat	also used in Chukotka; = senapun	"сяныпӯта, сяныпӯн"
sang-ngan	pos	IPA	poor thing!	"particle; used when one is feeling sorry for another; pronounced with ng geminated; Aghnam pimakanga, ""Amaghluten, aglaallaken.""  Aghnaghaam akisimakanga, ""Whangamneng aglaghllequnga."" Aghnam pimakanga, ""Sang-ngan, naagllequten."" ‘“Carrying you on the back, let me take you over.” The girl answered, “I shall go on my own.” The woman replied, “Poor thing, you will trip and fall.”’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 70)"	сяң-ңан
sangan	pos	IPA	why?	"particle; this is an inflected form (with the alternative consequential mood)  of the base sa- 'to do what', so that it literally mean 'because of what?'; sangan taginanighsin? why don't you come?, when the cause is presumed not necessarily to lie directly with the person addressed; other forms exist for when the cause is presumed to lie with the subject of an intransitive verb or the object of a transitive verb; for example: sangavek taginanghisin? why didn't you come? (when the cause is presumed to lie with the person addressed); sangama kayusinghisinga? ‘why didn’t you help me?’(see grammar book, Jacobson 2001)"	сяңан
sanghanun	pos	IPA	for something; for what?	qayngun sanghanun maapiiquten? ‘are you here for something again?’; sanghanun aghvighnaqsin ‘what are you going to go across for?’	сянӷанун
sanghiighi-	pos	IPA	to recover; to perk up	"qawaagniilghiim qawaagtani aqfanasiighluku sanghiighiluni tengumalghii ‘the bird hunter was going over to get the bird he shot, but it recovered and flew away’; qikmighaat iilqeghllaguyalghiit sanghiighimaniiqiit ‘the dogs were in low spirits, but they perked up’"	сянӷӣӷи-
sangighqugh-	pos	IPA	"to wash dishes, hard surfaces, etc.; to wipe clean"	aghnam suna nunamelnguq sangighqughaa ‘the lady wiped up the dirt from the floor’	сяңиҳқуӷ-
sangigte-	pos	IPA	to wipe; to clean off (spilled liquid)	sangigtuq ‘he wiped himself off’; singigtaa ‘he wiped it’ / sangigngaaq ‘it is wiped already’	сяңихты-
sangiighhaq*	pos	IPA	small thing; tiny amount; little bit	"sangiighhaq taagna esgha sikugni ‘see there is a little thing of some sort out there on the sea ice’; kaay, sangiighhaq legan tawaten angkalghii tagivaghaa qayughniighyama ‘see, she gave me only a small amount like this when I asked for tea’"	сяңӣҳақ
sangiighi-	pos	IPA	"to recover from illness, mishap, etc."	No information given.	сяңӣӷи-
sangiite-	pos	IPA	to be deprived (of); to not have any more of	No information given.	сяңӣты-
sangunanigh-	pos	IPA	to be unconscious because of severe pain or a wound; to become delirious; to be totally exhausted; to be limp	"ifliikaghteng ayvasaasluku ayveq naalkesaqmegteggu taawa sangunaniimalghiillu ‘when they found their wounded walrus, it had become unconscious’; iwerngaqun sangunanighyan naghullegluku tuqusimakangat ‘it was only when it was unconscious that they harpooned it and killed it’"	сяңунаниӷ-
sangusiq	pos	IPA	some; what; any kind; whatever kind	"sangusiq teghigaq naghughtuq nunivagkun ‘some animals passed by in the tundra’; sangusiiwa taana? ‘what is that?’; Kaviipik, silver fox, sangusiq amiiraq, beaver-a amiiraq, neghsam amiiraa taagantuteftuq akingat akikegkaat. ‘Red fox, silver fox, whatever kind of skin, beaver skin, sealskin, they were there, to be traded or sold.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:214); Sangusiq taakwagun, aagaqegkan, tuqutaqigu. ‘Anything that happens to come your way, kill it.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 61)"	сяңусиқ
sangwaa	pos	IPA	what (thing)?; something	"for singular, used for absolutive only (saam (q.v.) is the relative; sa is used as the base for forming other cases); for plural or dual, used for absolutive or relative; sangwaa aklukesteggu estugaghmeng? ‘what do youpl. need from the store?’; piyaqmegteggu sangwaa esghaamakangat talughtekestiinalghii ‘it turns out that they had seen something as it was disappearing from view’; Sangwaa legan agleghnalghii sangwaa uksumi tamaani pingigalkangat. Sangwaat sariighet, naghaalqusiighem sariighi agleghnaghpetut, nanevgat pisnanillghit. ‘Something then, a revered thing, something, in the winter at that time they didn’t do it.  Some competitions, athletic competions, were revered, (and therefore) forbidden by the elders. ’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:18); Sangwaa taawa umyugaghpeni suumqepigtaqsigu? ‘What in your mind are you thinking so deeply about?’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:29)"	сяңӱā
sangyagh-	pos	IPA	to be hard to move or pull; to be slow at learning	sangyaghtuq ‘it doesn't slide easily’ / qamiyem suqii suvinalghiit sangyaghtut qenaaghmi qamuqaaluteng ‘rough sled runners are difficult to pull over sand’; peanut-butter-et sangyapigtut tuufnaqegkaaluteng ilangunateng qiighnaaqutmeng ‘peanut butter is hard to swallow without something to facilitate its sliding down (the throat)[such as jelly]’	сяңьяӷ-
sangyite-	pos	IPA	to not slide easily; to slow down due to rough ground or other adverse conditions	"sangyituq ‘it isn't sliding easily, it became slow’ / sangyitestaa ‘it made it slow’"	сяңӥиты-
sani	pos	IPA	side area	saningani ‘at its side’; sanitmun ‘sideways’ or ‘to the side’	сяни
sanigh-	pos	IPA	sideways	postural root; sanightuq ‘he turned sideways’; sanightaa ‘he put it sideways (with respect to something else)’; sanighngaaq ‘it is sideways’	сяниӷ-
sanighhuwaagh-	pos	IPA	to roll about	Chukotkan (R)	сяниҳуӱāӷ-
Sanighmelngughmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	#NAME?	Сяниӷмылңуӷмӣ(т)
Sanighmelnguut	pos	IPA	a particular clan	#NAME?	Сяниӷмылңӯт
sanightaaq	pos	IPA	woman's fancy gutskin parka with dangling decorations sewn on in horizontal rows from the hood down to the hem	the dangling decorations are auklet crests or the ornament-like appendages that hang from the sides of the mouth of an auklet	сяниҳтāқ
sanighyaq	pos	IPA	barrier; crosspiece; obstruction; interruption to one's thoughts; mental obstruction; bar such as one put across a door to prevent entry; bar across  back of sled	No information given.	сяниӷьяқ
sanighyigh-	pos	IPA	to bar entry; to interrupt one’s thoughts	sanighyighaa ‘he put a bar across it’ or ‘he interrupted her thoughts’; sanighyightuq ‘his thoughts have been interrupted’	сяниӷӣиӷ-
saniite-	pos	IPA	to impede activity making it difficult or impossible; to not be conducive to acting	"saniituq ‘it keeps one from doing things’ / Ayvigteq taamna nunakegsaghngaan, uksumi saniitutanganeng, umegneghpaalluutanganeng, savigitutanganeng avelghaghaat anuqetuqaq. Ayvigteq saniilnguq piyaaniilnguq. ‘Even though Ayvigteq had solid ground, in the winter, because of the fact that it wasn’t conducive to activity, because of the snowstorms, because there wasn’t opportunity to do things, they’d miss the chance (to hunt), it being very windy. Ayvigteq would make activity impossible, it wasn’t not good for hunting on foot.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:64)"	сянӣты-
saniligh-	pos	IPA	to build addition or add onto side of building	No information given.	сянилиӷ-
sanineq	pos	IPA	ice-free edge when ice has broken away or where refrozen slush ice meets water	see item 65 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сянинық
saningughtaq	pos	IPA	quiver for arrows	No information given.	сяниңуҳтақ
saniqaq	pos	IPA	one’s side	pusim yugtaanghem iqaghqumaa ellmi qatelghii saniqani ‘the male cat got it’s white side dirty’	сяниқақ
saniqin	pos	IPA	one of two beams that lies on the side pillars of a winter house frame	Chukotkan (R)	сяниқин
saniquun	pos	IPA	centerboard for boat	cf. sanipuun	сяниқӯн
sanitmiighte-	pos	IPA	to go sideways or to the side	No information given.	сянитмьӣҳты-
sanivlegagh-	pos	IPA	to suddenly turn or skid sideways or to the side when moving	qamiskek qamughakek sanivlegaghlutek uuvghumalghiik ‘the sled he was pulling suddenly turned sideways and tipped over’	сянивлыгаӷ-
sanqun	pos	IPA	equipment; tool; device; weapon; useful item	sanqutet ‘a set of hunting equipment’	сянқун
sanqutraaq	pos	IPA	makeshift tool; crude device	No information given.	сянқутшāқ
Santi	pos	IPA	Sunday	No information given.	Сянти
santilleq	pos	IPA	week	"Santilleq ataasiq atughluku maligsaaghtet tawanllaataqat mangteghami, …. ‘One week later the disciples were gathered in the house, ….’ (John 20.26)"	сянтильық
santiyagh-	pos	IPA	to go to Sunday church service	No information given.	сянтияӷ-
sapaaslug-	pos	IPA	to enslave; to mistreat	yaywali sapaasluguluni anglikaamalghii ‘the orphan had been raised as a slave and had been mistreated’	сяпāсльюг-
sapaasluk	pos	IPA	lowly person; menial; underling	No information given.	сяпāсльюк
sapayu-	pos	IPA	No information given.	root;  > sapayughhiite--; sapayungigh-	сяпаю-
sapayughhiite-	pos	IPA	to be alert; to be okay (of a person)	No information given.	сяпаюҳӣты-
sapayungigh-	pos	IPA	to recover from illness; to regain consciousness; to perk up	"ifkaghluni tuqufkaqaq tagtalmi sapayungightuq ‘he fell and knocked himself out, but he regained consciousness’"	сяпаюңиӷ-
sape-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > saape-, sapughagh, saaputaq; cf. safk-"	сяпы-
sapeghhnagh-	pos	IPA	for weather to be very cold	sapeghhnaghtuq ‘it is very cold’ / sapeghhnaghsimaa ‘it has become very cold’	сяпыҳньаӷ-
sapeghhnaq	pos	IPA	very cold weather	"Sapeghhnami whaten kaneghllakayuguut aagram qaayngi, nateghmi. ‘In very cold weather there’d be lots of frost on the “aagra” (the inner warmer living enclosure) and in the entranceway.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:106)"	сяпыҳньақ
sapegi-	pos	IPA	to lose game animal by its escaping	"maklagtaghteng tugungwaaghluku sapegimaat ‘they took their bearded seal alright, but they lost it’; cf. saapkute-"	сяпыги-
Sapeni	pos	IPA	Japanese	also used in Chukotka	Сяпыни
sapiglleghhiistun	pos	IPA	for no reason at all; purposelessly; unexpectedly	particle; mekelghiighhaam sapiglleghhiistun siingaa naghaalgutni ‘the little boy pushed his playmate for no reason at all’	сяпихльыҳӣстун
sapiiqe-	pos	IPA	to negatively experience extreme cold; to be overcome by extreme cold	maqiilnguut sapiiqnaqii sapeghhnami ‘those who don’t dress warm will be extremely cold outside’	сяпӣқы-
sapughagh-	pos	IPA	"to drive (a herd of reindeer) to a new place; to drive animal(s) in the desired direction by blocking other paths; to cover (it, them) repeatedly or continuously"	"uksaghyagu quyngighqwaaghtet sapughaamiit quyngit meghem tunganganun ‘when it became fall time, the reindeer herders drove the reindeer herd towards the ocean’; yugem sapughaghluku qikmiq nuyaalghii riigtenganun iteghtestaa ‘the man chased and guided the timid dog into its den’"	сяпуӷāӷ-
saputaq	pos	IPA	cover; lid; curtain; shade	#NAME?	сяпутақ
saqaaghhiite-	pos	IPA	to be clearly visible	naayghat paamkut saqaaghhiitut ‘the Chukotkan mountains are clearly visible’	сяқāҳӣты-
saqaaghiighute-	pos	IPA	to have one’s vision improve	"iyegaasighyalghiimi pinilghiigneng esghallgha saqaaghhiighutuq ‘when he got a good pair of glasses, his vision became very clear’"	сақāӷӣӷуты-
saqaarae	pos	IPA	granulated sugar	No information given.	сяқāраы
saqe-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > saqeghte-, saqeme-, saaqghaghte-, saqrugaghte-"	сяқы-
"saqeghqe-, saqighqe-"	pos	IPA	to break to bits; to chip off in bits	saqeghqaa ‘he broke it to pieces’ / < saqeghte-ghqe3-	"сяқыҳқы-, сяқиҳқы-"
"saqeghqelleq, saqighqelleq"	pos	IPA	fragment; chip; scrap	No information given.	"сяқыҳқыльық, сяқиҳқыльық"
"saqeghte-, saqighte-"	pos	IPA	to chip off a piece	No information given.	"сяқыҳты-, сяқиҳты-"
saqeme-	pos	IPA	to crumble to pieces	saqemuq ‘it crumbled to pieces’ / saqemtaa ‘he crumbled it to pieces’; cf. sagheve-	сяқымы-
saqfigh-	pos	IPA	toes turned out	postural root; saqfightuq ‘he positioned his feet with the toes turned out’; saqfighngaaq ‘he has his toes turned out’; nekevghaaq saqfighmi ‘he is standing with his toes turned out’	сяқфиӷ-
saqfitu-	pos	IPA	to be splayfooted	saqfituuq ‘he is splayfooted’ /	сяқфиту-
saqfituqaq	pos	IPA	splayfooted person	No information given.	сяқфитуқақ
saqighaghte-	pos	IPA	to accidentally or suddenly chip	= saaqghaaghte-	сяқиӷаҳты-
saqipeg-	pos	IPA	to sweep; to rake; to scrape	neghuunneghmeng taaqluteng aghnuam qayuutaq saqipgaa ‘when they got done eating the woman scraped the wooden platter’	сяқипыг-
saqlak	pos	IPA	edible root of rosewort (roseroot); (Rhodiola atropurpurea)	found in the mountains; tastes like radish	сяқльяк
saqralqaq	pos	IPA	"ice which, although still solid enough for walking, is such that footprints left on it fill with water; sea ice with water-saturated surface, hard to walk, sled or work on"	cf. saqe-; see item 66 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сяқшальқақ
saqrugaghte-	pos	IPA	to chip (of glass or the like)	saqrugaghtuq ‘it got chipped’; saqrugaghtaa ‘he chipped it’ /	сяқшугаҳты-
saqrugneq	pos	IPA	chip (of glass or the like)	saqrugaghtuq ‘it got chipped’; saqrugaghtaa ‘he chipped it’ /	сяқшугнық
saqrugta	pos	IPA	how nice!; congratulations!	exclamatory particle; saqrugta una ‘good for you!’	сяқшухта
saqrugtatuq	pos	IPA	oh dear!	"exclamatory particle; Mekelghiiq iitghumalghii amik naafqevzighluku. Nanevgaam pimakanga, ""Iik saqrugtatuq taana!"" ‘The boy went in almost breaking the door in the proscess. The old man said, “Gee whillikers, that boy!”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 68)"	сяқшухтатуқ
saqugmun	pos	IPA	diagonally	particle	сяқугмун
saqugneq	pos	IPA	triangle; triangular shaped piece trimmed off edge of skin or the like	#NAME?	сяқугнық
saqugtelleq	pos	IPA	triangle; triangular shaped piece trimmed off edge of skin or the like	#NAME?	сяқухтыльық
saquk	pos	IPA	edge of skin or meat which is often cut off and discarded	No information given.	сяқук
saqumig-	pos	IPA	to hold in the crook of the arm with the arm held out and up; to hug; to embrace	saqumigtuq ‘she is holding something in the crook of her arm’; saqumigaa ‘she is holding it in the crook of her arm’ / cf. yaquq	сяқумиг-
saqumiite-	pos	IPA	to give one something of a size that could be carried in the crook of the arm	formerly a form of charity	сяқумӣты-
saquste-	pos	IPA	to glide to the side (of a bird)	cf. yaquq or saaqw	сяқусты-
sari	pos	IPA	"non-native type dog, especially one with droopy ears"	No information given.	сяри
sariigh-	pos	IPA	to hold competive event; to have entertainment; to celebrate	No information given.	сярӣӷ-
sariiq	pos	IPA	competion; entertainment	"sariiq kiyang tamaana atughtalwaaqelghii ‘most entertainment events are followed by Eskimo singing’; sariighllagmi tawani yugiqengegkaaguq ‘at the competitions, he beat everyone’"	сярӣқ
sarma-	pos	IPA	to brag	sarmaaq ‘he bragged’ / sarmatkaa panini pillguniluku ‘he bragged about his daughter saying that she was able to do things well’	сярма-
sasii-	pos	IPA	to be a practice (something one does habitually or from time to time); to be a device	No information given.	сясӣ-
sasiq	pos	IPA	habit; device; practice; tool	sasii anengaghpek mingilasaqunaki ‘don’t scatter your brother’s tools about’	сясиқ
sasiqumtaaq	pos	IPA	predictable even; custom; customary practice	"Apeghiighyami kenghhwak kumaghllukek, sasiqumtaaghat ayumiq kenghhwighluteng neqa kenghhwam uvitanganun llilaghtughllagaqluku. ‘When he lit a fire; it was their age-old custom to build a ceremonial fire and place food around it.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:256)"	сясиқумтāқ
sasluggaq	pos	IPA	small amount; little bit	mangtak sasluggaq tagivaghaa ‘she game me just a little piece of muktuk’; sasluggaghmeng eslallugughtaa ‘it rained only a little’	сясльЮхақ
sasta	pos	IPA	one who is in charge or has a specialty	"Kusukaq taana estuwaaftuq, taana naliq ighnegha Angunguftuq ama sastenguuq. ‘That Kusukaq was a store manager, and one of his sons, it was Angu, also was someone who had a position of responsibility.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:212)"	сяста
saste-	pos	IPA	"to make one act or feel a certain way (generally, with a negative implication)"	sasluku ‘making him feel uncomfortable’	сясты-
sastegheslak	pos	IPA	northern right whale (Eubalaena glacialis)	No information given.	сястыӷысльяк
satae1	pos	IPA	inner (hairless) side of a pelt	"saatnga or satanga ‘its hairless side’; amim saatngan amiqerregaa keligluku taaqluku enraq mumiglluku melqulganun melqiighaa ‘scraping the dried membrane off the inside he turned it over when finished and removed the fur from the other side’; saatnguuq ‘it is the inside [of the pelt]’; Kiigmi enraq temkaluget aghvigluki, satangi kavighlluki piiqiit kamengllaghaqiit. ‘In the summertime they would wash the old sealskin pants, color their skin side red and make them into boots.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:114)"	сятаы1
satae2	pos	IPA	device; cause	"from the ""empty base"", sa-, which is ""stress-repelling"" (see Jacobson  1984b) so that the a does not lengthen during suffixation: satnguuq ‘it is a device’, ‘it is the cause of something’"	сятаы2
satae3	pos	IPA	jellyfish	Chukotkan	сятаы3
sategte-	pos	IPA	to clean the hairless side of an animal pelt; to clean the inside of a skin tent; to eat fish by stripping the meat off the skin; to clean summer-type hair-in sealskin boots	"sategtaa ‘he cleaned it’ / cf. sallegte-, satae1"	сятыхты-
satelgaq	pos	IPA	sandhill crane (Grus canadensis)	"Satelgaq, quuk, yungaghaqulluni kiigem qawaaga, pennam qawaaga katelghaatuq …. ‘The crane and the swan, together with the  jaeger, the summer bird and the cliff bird, have all arrived, ….’   (SIKU. ESL. ESGHA. 106)"	сятылгақ
sateme-	pos	IPA	to comes loose from what it is fastened to (of a rope)	tapghapiget aghineghmeggni satemyugumaat ‘leather skin ropes are easy to loosen when they become wet’	сятымы-
satun	pos	IPA	somehow; sometimes	adverbial particle; unangkii kaleveghllaget satun naqam ilangani pugleghaqluteng ‘the seals he catches sink most of the time but somehow some of them surface sometimes’	сятун
satuvak	pos	IPA	arctic grayling (Thymallus arcticus)	Satuvagem metengtii aangeghllalghiit. ‘The grayling’s fins are very large.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 100)	сятувак
saveg-	pos	IPA	to harpoon	No information given.	сявыг-
Savegkaghhaq	pos	IPA	Savukahuk Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Сявыхкаҳақ
savegsite-	pos	IPA	to aim harpoon	No information given.	сявыхситы-
savek	pos	IPA	head unit of whaling harpoon	"saavget ‘entire set consisting of harpoon, head, rope, and floats’"	сявык
savigaq	pos	IPA	shaved skin of bearded seal used for making rope	savigameng uyiingllaamalghii ‘he made a rope out of shaved bearded seal skin’	сявигақ
savigh-	pos	IPA	for there to be whitecaps on the ocean and a strong current	esnevaqestiighpenang savighlleqaaten ‘don't get too near to the waves as they will sweep you away’	сявиӷ-
savighhe-	pos	IPA	to whittle; to carve; to make red-hot	savighhuq ‘he is carving’; savighhaa ‘he is carving it’ / savighhwaaghhu llivelgham esnenga sukinniighutesqelluku ‘use a knife to make the edge of the shelf smooth so that no one gets a splinter’	сявиҳы-
savigkaq	pos	IPA	shale; slate	No information given.	сявихкақ
savigpak	pos	IPA	sword; large knife	"Whangkuta nunavut atighaqaat Soyuzengat Sovætskit Sotsialistichæskit Ræspublikangita. Kærbametuq savigpak enkaam repa. ‘They call our land the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. On the insignia (kærba) is a sickle and a hammer.’ (YUP. ULUNG. 2:180); Savigpagen kanaghtigu qantanun, qayughllak qamaglluteng savigpagmeng atuqilghiit savigpagkun tuqusaghqaagut. ‘Put your sword back in the scabbard, because all who live by the sword shall die by the sword.’ (Matthew 26.52)"	сявихпак
savigsi-	pos	IPA	to get a knife ready for use	neghsaq aftanaluku savigsitaa ‘he got his knife ready to butcher the seal’	сявихси-
savigsigh-	pos	IPA	to sharpen; to get knife ready	No information given.	сявихсиӷ-
savigtaagh-	pos	IPA	to point knife at something or someone preparatory to attacking with it	No information given.	сявихтāӷ-
savigtaq	pos	IPA	blade	No information given.	сявихтақ
savigtigh-	pos	IPA	to direct a knife preparatory to attacking with it	No information given.	сявихтиӷ-
saviigaq	pos	IPA	rope made from sheared bearded seal skin	No information given.	сявӣгақ
saviigh-	pos	IPA	to forge (metal); to make red hot	Chukotkan (R)	сявӣӷ
saviighusiq	pos	IPA	forge for working on metal	Chukotkan (R)	сявӣӷусиқ
Savik	pos	IPA	site in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Сявик
savik1	pos	IPA	knife for cutting (not semi-lunar type)	No information given.	сявик1
savik2	pos	IPA	"place, time or opportunity to do something"	savigituq ‘he didn’t have a chance to act’	сявик2
savikenghaaq	pos	IPA	tin; metal; aluminum	Kiigmi maaken savikenghaaghmeng angyaqluteng …. ‘In the summer they use aluminum boats ….’ (MRS. DELLA W. 12)	сявикынӷāқ
savilquq	pos	IPA	small curved knife	No information given.	сявильқуқ
savinaq	pos	IPA	tip of gunwale protruding at end of skin boat	cf. savik	сявинақ
savineq	pos	IPA	plain; valley	Chukotkan (V&E)	сявинық
saviq	pos	IPA	whitecap	No information given.	сявиқ
saviwaaq	pos	IPA	knife made of walrus ivory and baleen	No information given.	сявиӱāқ
sayae	pos	IPA	"front of body, house or mountains; walrus skin put over door of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.); edge of sealskin"	"saaynga ‘its front’, ‘his front’; Aghnaq sumeghtaghaghtuq, “Ugika taameng neqengyiighullii, aghnameng naalkusimalghii pennam saayngani whaa.” ‘The woman thought, “No wonder my husband can’t provide food any more; he has found a woman in the front (or side) of the cliff.”’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:264)"	сяяы
sayaghtaq	pos	IPA	hoop of drum	Chukotkan (V&E)	сяяҳтақ
sayan	pos	IPA	for some reason	"Maaten agavek sayan isekiyugesqelluku aghnaq yugem, atalughat tuguluki ggatmeghruganun lliyaghii. ‘Then the man wanted the woman to feel cold for some reason and so he took the cubes of blubber and put them down her back.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 123)"	сяян
sayaneq	pos	IPA	strong one; sturdy one	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	сяянық
sayekaghetaq	pos	IPA	violin	"Chukotkan (R, V&E); used in the dual, sayekaghetak, for one violin"	сяӥыкаӷытақ
sayengqughruk	pos	IPA	rib cage	Chukotkan (R)	сяӥыңқуӷрук
sayghun	pos	IPA	hunting gear	"generally used in the plural, sayghutet; sayghuteteng puyguluki kesimalghiit ‘they forgot to bring their hunting gear when they went out to see’; sayghutangilnguq ‘one without hunting gear’"	сяӥӷун
sayghutaq	pos	IPA	set of hunting implements	No information given.	сяӥӷутақ
sayik	pos	IPA	lung power	No information given.	сяӥик
sayug-	pos	IPA	to pull; to tug	"sayugtuq ‘he pulled himself to something or up onto something’; sayugaa ‘he pulled it’ / sayugiiq ‘he pulled something’; Angyaghput sayugaghput sikum qaaynganun. ‘We pulled our boat on top of the ice.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 150); Eng, estu, sayugnaanghitamken meghmun aatqaghtekuvek! ‘Go ahead and slide; I won’t pull you out if you land in the water.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I 6)"	сяюг-
sayugaataq	pos	IPA	dresser; drawer	"used in the dual, sayugaatak, for one dresser or drawer"	сяюгāтақ
sayugh-	pos	IPA	to dance a set non-improvised Eskimo dance	No information given.	сяюӷ-
sayughqaagh-	pos	IPA	"to become hard, strong and durable (of skin)"	Chukotkan (R); atungak tukrugem sayughqaaghaquq ‘the skin is getting strong by getting hard’	сяюҳқāӷ-
sayughqusiq	pos	IPA	starter cord on a gasoline engine	No information given.	сяюҳқусиқ
sayugpagtagh-	pos	IPA	to pull with repeated jerks; to have a tremor; to have a tic; to twitch	No information given.	сяюхпахтаӷ-
sayugtaagh-	pos	IPA	to tug	mekelghiighhaam sayugtaaghaqaa waapenga angyaghwaaghem ‘the small boy is tugging on the little boat’s tow rope’	сяюхтāӷ-
sayugun	pos	IPA	halyard	No information given.	сяюгун
sayukaneq	pos	IPA	gravity	No information given.	сяюканық
sayuugte-	pos	IPA	to shrink or warp from drying; to feel tense; to be in a tall column (of clouds)	sayuugtuq or sayuugtaa ‘it shrank’ / uliighegka sayuugtaak taakuk agaghngakak maatneghmi ima akugaaghhaaneng ‘my pair of sheared boots that were left hanging for days in the heat have shrunk’; umyugakek sayuugteghlaguuk ‘he feels tense’	сяю̄хты-
sayuulnga	pos	IPA	low table or tray for tea; coffee table; mat placed on floor for teacups and the like	#NAME?	сяю̄лңа
"sayuun, sayuusiq"	pos	IPA	song used for a traditional dance	also sayuuta	"сяю̄н, сяю̄сиқ"
sefkagh-	pos	IPA	to accidentally cut or tear through (as to the edge when making a hole near the edge of a skin)	sefkaqaaguq ‘it got cut through’ /	сыфкаӷ-
sefkaghte-	pos	IPA	to accidentally burst (as an overstuffed meat poke)	sefkaghtekaaguq ‘it burst’ /	сыфкаҳты-
seflugpak	pos	IPA	horn (as of a car); factory whistle	Chukotkan (R); = suflugpak	сыфльюхпак
sefluqaghte-	pos	IPA	to pierce through	= sufluqaghte-	сыфльюқаҳты-
segefkagh-	pos	IPA	to make holes in something	No information given.	сыгыфкаӷ-
segeghqwaakaq	pos	IPA	dry brittle wood	unaghsiq segeghqwaakaq kagimumalghii ‘the piece of dry brittle wood broke’; cf. segeghte-	сыгыҳқӱāкақ
segeghte-	pos	IPA	to dry excessively and become brittle (of wood)	"segeghhnayukayek qamiyegni piinequmaak ‘lest his sled became too dry and brittle, he painted it’; cf. segeghqwaakaq"	сыгыҳты-
segeghte-	pos	IPA	to become dry and brittle (of wood)	No information given.	сыгыҳты-
segelaan	pos	IPA	"hanger for clothes (suspended rod hung in the back of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.))"	No information given.	сыгыля̄н
segelmik	pos	IPA	thin and light-weight strap for a harpoon	Chukotkan (R)	сыгылмик
segeni-	pos	IPA	to decorate with reindeer or caribou chin hairs sewn on the  surface of a hide in a garment; to embroider with reindeer or caribou chin hairs	No information given.	сыгыни-
segeq	pos	IPA	dry brittle wood	No information given.	сыгық
segesqugh-	pos	IPA	kneeling	postural root; segesqughtuq ‘he kneeled’; segesqughngaaq ‘he is kneeling’; segesqughmi yughaghtuq ‘he prayed in a kneeling position’	сыгысқуӷ-
segesqughlluk	pos	IPA	tendon of the back leg of a reindeer	Chukotkan (R)	сыгысқуҳльюк
segesquq	pos	IPA	knee	No information given.	сыгысқуқ
segesqwaaq	pos	IPA	kneecap	No information given.	сыгысқӱāқ
segeve-	pos	IPA	to wear through or almost through	angyiita amiikek segevuk aghyum ‘their boat’s skin got so worn out from ageing’	сыгывы-
segevneq	pos	IPA	crack (as in sea ice)	Segevneq sikumelnguq maamaquq. ‘The crack in the is is freezing over.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 89)	сыгывнық
segge-	pos	IPA	to cut open; to slash; to split open	"segguq ‘it split open’, ‘he slashed himself’ ; seggaa ‘he cut it open’ / seggelleqaa ‘he will cut it open’; seggaa yugem neqelghutaq awataghpak saayngakun ‘the man slashed an opening on the side of the food-storage poke’"	сыхы-
seggute-	pos	IPA	to slam crash or plunge into something	Chukotkan (R); angyaq seggusimaaq esnamun ‘the boat slammed onto the shore’	сыхуты-
segguutaq	pos	IPA	gore or gusset (of material)	Chukotkan (R)	сыхӯтақ
segheve-	pos	IPA	to calm down; to diminish in intensity (of emotion)	seghevuq ‘he calmed down’ / taghnughhaq qiyaaghwaghllagluni seghevataaghaghtuq ‘the baby finally calmed down from his crying’	сыӷывы-
seghevute-	pos	IPA	to forgive	seghevutaa ‘he forgave her’ / Seghevutaghaghtiki seghleghqelleput seghevusimaluku seghletun pisteput. ‘Forgive us our bad deeds as we forgive  those who treat us badly.’ (Matthew 6.12)	сыӷывуты-
seghhaagh-	pos	IPA	to hiss (of liquid on hot surface)	seghhaaghtuq ‘it hissed’	сыҳāӷ-
seghhaghute-	pos	IPA	to sizzle	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	сыҳаӷуты-
seghhe-	pos	IPA	to sweat profusely; to gather condensation (on it); for dew to freeze (in fall time)	"seghhuq ‘ he sweated’; seghhaa ‘he is sweating’, ‘it is getting condensation on it’, ‘the dew froze’ / seghhelleq ‘sweat, condensation’"	сыҳы-
seghleghhalek	pos	IPA	"oh how exciting!; what a surprise!; oh, how grateful I am!; oh, how awful!"	exclamatory particle	сыӷлыҳалык
seghleghnaq	pos	IPA	"bad event that causes sadness, discomfort, etc."	No information given.	сыӷлыӷнақ
seghleghni-	pos	IPA	to feel bad (for a long time) about a situation	No information given.	сыӷлыӷни-
seghleghqe-	pos	IPA	to err; to make a mistake; to sin; to be in a very unfortunate situation	"seghleghquq igaqilleghmineng ‘he made a mistake in his writin’g; seghleghqegkaaguq apelleghmi ‘from what's been said, he has sinned’; seghleghniighaqut taakut net ima panigat tuqumaaq ‘that household is in a very bad situation since their daughter has died’"	сыӷлыҳқы-
seghleghqwaaq	pos	IPA	rubbish; trash	No information given.	сыӷлыҳқӱāқ
seghleghu-	pos	IPA	to be bad	No information given.	сыӷлыӷу-
seghleghyug-	pos	IPA	to feel bad (for a short time); to have hurt feelings	No information given.	сыӷлыӷьюг-
seghleliigh-	pos	IPA	to have a hard time; to grieve; to experience depression	iqlengiqutkelluki ilangi seghleliighqiimalghii ‘he lied about the others and had a hard time’	сыӷлылӣӷ-
seghleq	pos	IPA	bad thing or situation; useless thing; wrong one	"seghleq tagivaghaa ‘he gave (me) the wrong one (or a bad one)’; seghleq atuqaat kiilqusiq apangat aviighutaqngan ‘they went through a bad period all summer while their grandfather had died’; esla seghleq usaalqusiq kiyaghtuq ‘it was bad weather all fall’; seghleghuuq ‘it is bad, wrong, worthless’"	сыӷлық
seghleqe-	pos	IPA	to criticize; to dislike	seghleqaa ‘he dislikes it’ /	сыӷлықы-
seghletun	pos	IPA	badly; wrong; carelessly or stupidly; poorly	"particle; seghletun ayuquq ‘it is poor, not good’; seghletun kiyaghtaquq ‘he lives poorly’"	сыӷлытун
segneq	pos	IPA	pot; pan; food container; dish; bowl	"may be used in the dual, sagneghek, for one bowl; = sagneq, signeq"	сыгнық
Sekennaak	pos	IPA	Sekinak Lagoon and site at its southeast end on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 and Map 6 in Appendices	Сыкыньāк
Sekennaam kenlanga	pos	IPA	site with VABM  “Geena” at northwest end of Sekinak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Сыкыньāм кынляңа
sekete-	pos	IPA	"to dunk or bury one's head in something; to bend way over forward (people, birds); to dip into something; to lower the head"	seketuq ‘it is dunking its head’; seketaa ‘he is dunking his (someone else's) head’ /	сыкыты-
seketeste-	pos	IPA	to set in (of fog)	atgenra tagituk seketestaa tengegkayuget kaatut ‘the fog set in just as the plane was coming in’; cf. sekete-	сыкытысты-
semnga	pos	IPA	castrated reindeer	No information given.	сымңа
semqatwhalae	pos	IPA	pocket knife	"used in dual, semqatwhalekfor one ‘pocket knife’;  = semqatwhalik"	сымқатхӱалаы
semqatwhali	pos	IPA	pocket knife	"used in dual, semqawhalik, for one ‘pocket knife’;  Semqatwhaligni imeglukek estegmiglukek atami nuluusii ivaghyaghtuumakanga. ‘Folding up his pocket knife he put it in his pocket, and went to look for his father’s fishing pole and line.’ (SULUWET 68); = semqatwhala"	сымқатхӱали
senapun	pos	IPA	centerboard in wooden whaleboat	#NAME?	сынапун
sengelqagh-	pos	IPA	to hop on one leg	sengelqaghtuq ‘he hopped’; sengelqaghaa ‘he hopped across or over it’ / cf. senglepeghte-	сыңыльқаӷ-
senglepegragh-	pos	IPA	to limp around	senglepegraghtuq ‘he’s limping around’ /	сыңлыпыграӷ-
senglepegte-	pos	IPA	to limp	senglepegtuq ‘he limped’ / = singlepegte-; cf. sengelqagh-	сыңлыпыхты-
sengngugh-	pos	IPA	for overflow water to collect on lake or river ice 	No information given.	сыңьуӷ-
sengnguq  	pos	IPA	open route amid sea ice; overflow water on lake or river ice	No information given.	сыңьуқ
seqemengeltagh-	pos	IPA	"to exude liquid, especially blood, in bead-like form"	kilillgha sivukluni aawmeng seqemengeltaghluni aagtuquq ‘at first his cut started to bleed in beads before the blood really started to flow’ 	сықымыңыльтаӷ-
seve-	pos	IPA	"to cut or tear through cloth, skin, flesh, etc., especially starting from a hole"	"sevuq ‘it got cut through’; sevaa ‘he cut through it’ / cf. sefkagh-, sefkaghte-"	сывы-
sevnaawraq	pos	IPA	“tea leaves”	exact identification undetermined	сывнāӱрақ
sevraquma-	pos	IPA	to be toothed (have sharp projections)	cf. sevri sevri ‘a “tri-toothed” bone in a fish head that can be fatal if swallowed’; iqallugem sevringa ‘a fish’s “tri-toothed” bone’	сыврақума-
sevri	pos	IPA	“three-toothed” bone in a fish head that can be fatal if swallowed	iqallugem sevringa ‘a fish’s “three-toothed” bone’; cf. sevraquma-	сыври
siftagh-	pos	IPA	to flatten; to plant one’s feet firmly on the floor; to crush	meghutlugek tuullukek siftaghqaak ‘he flattened the can by stepping on it’; Qalqalimakun elngaatall unaghsikun siftaghlluki siqlugwiiqakun taaggun. ‘With an axe we’d flatten them to put in the storage cellar.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:98); Qayaqsighvik teskanavek ketfaghluni ugugnaghaq tuusaqenni siftaghqumakanga. ‘Qayaqsighvik went down there and when he stepped on the shrew he crushed it.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 80)	сифтаӷ-
sifteghnak	pos	IPA	large flat rock	No information given.	сифтыӷнак
siftugh-	pos	IPA	to bury deeply	siftughaa ‘it buried it’ / qanigughteghllagluni yugem unkusengi siftuusimakangi ‘it snowed so heavily that the man's traps got buried’	сифтуӷ-
siftughughte-	pos	IPA	"to be in a kneeling position (of dogs, wolves)"	Chukotkan	сифтуӷуҳты-
Sigasit	pos	IPA	site on the coast east of Gambell at Tiflighak Bay	see Map 7 in Appendices	Сигасит
sighima-	pos	IPA	to hope; to have faith; to look forward to something	sighimaaq ‘he is looking forward to something’	сиӷима-
sighimake-	pos	IPA	to hope for	"sighimakaqeftii lipighsaghani kaannayukata tengegkayiskan ‘she’s hoping that her order comes in when the plane arrives’; Kuusmeyaghtuqanga sighimakestaghaqukut yughaghvigem mission box-ngan maqalghiimeng uligmeng. ‘With Christmas approaching, we’d start to anticipate a warm blanket from the church’s mission box.’ (KALLAG. 42); Esghaghqi elpek iiggeten igamsiqakumiita enkaam sighimakumiita. ‘Look at your hands, being thankful for them and full of expectation toward them.’ (AANGHHAQ 146)"	сиӷимакы-
"Sighinek, Sighineq"	pos	IPA	"Sireniki, village in Chukotka"	"this village originally spoke an Eskimo language very different from (Central Siberian) Yupik, but the older language, “Sirenikski” or “Starosirenikski” (“Old Sirenik”) is no longer spoken; at present the Eskimo speakers in this village speak only (Central Siberian) Yupik; Sighineghmii or Sighinegmii ‘person of Sireniki (including any present day (Yupik) resident)’; Sighinek wata angliiquq, nekeftaqiit nutaghat aangelghiit guygut, aanguq igaghviga, aghalighviga, nalugvilguuq vær'tolyotmun. ‘Sireniki is growing all the time; they put up big new buildings; its school is large, and also its clinic and airport for helicopters.’ (AANGHHAQ 153)"	"Сиӷинык, Сиӷинық"
sighla-	pos	IPA	to act with strong emotion; to go fast; to get plenty of something; to act with intensity	"sighlaaq ‘he is acting with strong emotion, with intensity’ / sighlatkaa aleni qivghuvikluku ivenruutegneng ‘he really got angry at his companion over the loss of the outboard motor’; angyat aygumun sighlaaqeftut ‘the boat had been heading north fast’; nanevgam sighlatkaqaa iqalluk quupqaategni ‘the old man is getting plenty of fish at the ice crack’"	сиӷля-
Sighnasugaq	pos	IPA	Nome	see Map 1 in Appendices	Сиӷнасюгақ
sighuneq	pos	IPA	antler	"sighuneghpalluq ‘one with big antlers’; Quyngit qamaglluteng neghegkayuguut. Sugupagi ayakaghaqluki, sigutangi, sighunghan melqwi, itegii ayakaghaqluki neghughaqiit. ‘Every part of the reindeer can be eaen. Its jowls, its ears, its antler’s velvet, and its feet, are barbecued and eaten.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:96)"	сиӷунық
Sighunpaget	pos	IPA	a particular clan	at Ungaziq in Chukotka; closely related to the Siqlugmiit ; singular is Sighunpak	Сиӷунпагыт
sighunpayaak	pos	IPA	fourhorn sculpin (Myoxocephalus quadricornis)	No information given.	сиӷунпая̄к
sighute-	pos	IPA	to get buried or covered over by action of waves and sand	mallum nalighnegha sighusimakanga ‘part of a carcass was buried by the waves’	сиӷуты-
sighyak	pos	IPA	ice fog; fog-like condition from tiny snow or ice particles suspended in the air	No information given.	сиӷьяк
sigiin	pos	IPA	"new ice in previously open lead in ice field; refrozen lead, good to walk on"	see item 67 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сигӣн
sigineq	pos	IPA	chapped lip	Chukotkan (R)	сигинық
sigiqe-	pos	IPA	"to break or shatter glass, eggshell, ceramic, etc."	sigiquq ‘it broke’; sigiqaa ‘he broke it’ /	сигиқы-
signeq	pos	IPA	pot; pan; food container; dish; bowl	"Chukotkan; may be used in the dual, signeghek, for one bowl; = sagneq, segneq"	сигнық
sigugneq	pos	IPA	"ice on or near shore formed from slush brought to the shore by waves, piled up and possibly refreezing when the water recedes"	"sigugnightuq ‘piled up slush ice collect on the beach, thick ice forms on the shore’; sigugneghiituq ‘the ice goes from the shore’; Taagken Taykegergen esnamun atghaamalghii. Sigugneghmun uugsimalghii. Uuglluni anglaaq ukinnaqumakanga. ‘Then Taykegergen when down to the shore. He got up on the piled ice near the shore. After he got up on it he made a hole in it.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 20); cf. siku; see item 67 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	сигугнық
sigun	pos	IPA	ear	"also siguta; sigutnga or sigutanga ‘his ear’; sigutegka kumlataak ‘my ears are cold’; Legannguq aghnam tawavek seketfikluku sigutangakun meghyaqminigu, meghyaqminigu iilqwa. Meghaa, meghaa, qamagtaa. Inglunganun qiifluku inglungallu meghaa, meghaa, meghaa sigutngakun iilqwa qaamna meghaa, qamagtaa.'And the woman dipped into with it through his ear when she drank it, she drank his brain. She drank it and drank it and finished it up. She twisted it around it to the inside of it [his skull] and drank its inside, she drank it and drank it and she drank that brain in there  through his ear finishing it up.' (AYUM. UNGIP. II:10); sigutegken sameng imangaghsigataak? ‘have your ears had anything come into them (that is, have you gotten any news)?’"	сигун
sigutkegsi-	pos	IPA	to stay alert for news; to “keep one’s ears open”	No information given.	сигуткыхси-
sigutkegsi-	pos	IPA	to keep alert for important news	No information given.	снгуткыхси-
sigutkesi-	pos	IPA	to listen for something	tengegkayuget kaannayukata sigutkegsitkaqanka ‘I am listening for the plane to come in’; ungipameng awen sigutkegsiiqsaghtuq ‘he often listens for news’	сигуткыси-
sigutlug-	pos	IPA	to have an ear infection or earache	No information given.	сигутльюг-
sigutluk	pos	IPA	ear infection; infected ear	No information given.	сигутльюк
sigutmeketaq	pos	IPA	"dried fruit (especially pear, peach or apricot); mushroom"	so called from their resemblance to an ear	сигутмыкытақ
sigutngiitaq	pos	IPA	earmuff	"used in the dual, sigutngiitak, for one pair of earmuffs"	сигутңьӣтақ
sigutqugh-	pos	IPA	to whisper into one's ear	sigutqughtuq ‘he whispered into someone's ear’; sigutqughaa ‘he whispered into her ear’ /	сигутқуӷ-
sii	pos	IPA	drumskin; thin newly frozen sheet of ice on water	"Neqmun, aqeftaghaghamun unatapsugmun saguyam siinganun siighnat atuqaqiit. ‘They use walrus stomachs for containers for food and for when they pick greens and for the skins of drums.’ (MRS. DELLA W. 52); used in the dual, siik, for the skin ofone drum, saguyam siikek ‘the drum's skin’"	сӣ
sii- 	pos	IPA	to put drumskin on a drum; for a sheet of thin ice to form on the water	saguyak siigaak ‘he put a skin on the drum’; naayvaq siimaa ‘the lake has gotten a sheet of ice on it’; siiyuwhaaghtuq ‘it is starting to freeze over’	сӣ-
siifte-	pos	IPA	"to set a net, snare, or trap"	siiftaa ‘he set it’ / siiftiiq ‘he set a net snare or trap’; siifutaa ‘he set a net snare or trap to catch it’	сӣфты-
siiggaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to degrade vision through condensation; to suddenly fog up	iyegaatkek enraq siiggaghaghtaghllawaak ‘but he keeps getting his glasses foggy from his breathe’; iyegaatkek siiggaghaghtaak qesighneghem ‘the mist suddenly fogged up his eyeglasses’	сӣхаӷаҳты-
siigh-	pos	IPA	"for weather to clear up; for fog, blizzard, or smoke to clear up, dissipate or pass"	siightuq or siighaa ‘it cleared up’ /	сӣӷ-
Siighmiik	pos	IPA	creek flowing from the southeast side of the mountain behind Gambell to the south end of Troutman Lake	see Map 7 in Appendices	Сӣӷмӣк
siighnaq	pos	IPA	walrus stomach	ayveghem siighnaa imanameng imaqeghllagpetuq ‘the walrus stomach was full of clams’; Siighnaq aqeftaghaaq neqmeng imiimakanga. ‘She filled the walrus stomach bag with food.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 69)	сӣӷнақ
siighni-1	pos	IPA	to prepare a walrus stomach for use as a bag	No information given.	сиӷни-1
siighni-2	pos	IPA	to skip a stone across the surface of the water	uyghak lliivneqegtaq miluulluku siighniiq ‘I threw a flat stone against the surface of the water and it skipped as it went’	сӣӷни-2
siigte-	pos	IPA	to have diarrhea	siigtuq ‘he just had (an attack of) diarrhea’; siigtaquq ‘he is having (repeated bouts) of diarrhea’	сӣхты-
siikaq	pos	IPA	dried walrus stomach to be used as a drum-skin	siikaqa taana saguyagma siinganun simiinnaluku piiqaqa ‘I am planning on having that walrus stomach for the drum as a replacement for the drum-skin’	сӣкақ
siikerek	pos	IPA	sound of the ground squirrel	imitative	сӣкырык
siiknegh-	pos	IPA	to be determined; to be persistent	"siikneghutmineng sameng allgeghquutuq ‘due to his determination he got all sorts of things’; siikneghuyaquvek naamaan lliighnayaghtuten ‘if you were more persistent, you would have enough material’"	сӣкньыӷ-
siikneq	pos	IPA	determined persevering person	cf. sikna-	сӣкньық
siilu	pos	IPA	brass; copper	"Moses-em napaghutellghatun siilumeng ulimaaqnemeghyaq kilgaani, …. ‘Like the serpent made of bronze that Moses had erected in the wilderness, ….’ (John 3.14)"	сӣлю
siilukaghqaq	pos	IPA	copper ore	No information given.	сӣлюкаҳқақ
siimghu	pos	IPA	small stick used for kindling; kindling; scrap of wood	"Enkaangam yuges-tamaakut yataaghqaqut, quugkameng quugsaghtughaqluteng, siimghumeng qupughaqluteng quugmeng, tagiquutaqiit mangteghameggnun. ‘Furthermore those people would get things ready, gathering firewood, splitting kindling, bringing it their houses.’ (MRS. DELLA W. 8)"	сӣмӷу
siinge-	pos	IPA	to push; to shove	siingaa ‘he pushed it’ / siingiiq ‘he shoved something’; siingluku qiyastaa ‘he made him cry by shoving him’	сӣңы-
"siingen, siingenllu"	pos	IPA	still; nevertheless; only; already	particle; Siingenllu ivenruun allgelghii. ‘By this time the outboard motor had made it’s appearance.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:170); Iitek naangan akuqaghnaqumayaqanga. Siingenllu aga kalevuq. ‘Her mother did try to grab her. Nevertheless she sank.’ (KIILUUQ 5)	"сӣңын, сӣңынлью"
siinghhaq	pos	IPA	newly formed layer of ice	No information given.	сӣнҳақ
siingleghagh-	pos	IPA	to push continuously; to plane wood	unaghsiq siingleghaghaa ‘he planed the piece of wood’; taghnughhaq qamiyngwaaghegnekun siingleghaghaa ‘she pushed the baby around on a sled’	сӣңлыӷаӷ-
siingleghaq	pos	IPA	carpenter's plane	"used in the dual, siingleghak, for one plane; evidentally a direct nominalization of siingleghagh-"	сӣңлыӷақ
siinguraq	pos	IPA	"ice floes floating close together in strip-like formation near the land, may extend far, dangerous to walk on"	see item 69 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сӣңурақ
siingutaq	pos	IPA	pole for pushing fishnet from shore	No information given.	сӣңутақ
siingvallaagh-	pos	IPA	to speak in anger or hatred	"siingvallaaghpenang emta pinitun pi ‘don’t be talking with an angry tone again, be nice’"	сӣңвальāӷ-
siingvallagha-	pos	IPA	to speak in an aggressive manner	"Siingvallaghangigatut; men ayghighllequq. ‘They don’t talk in an aggressive, pushy way [and you mustn’t either]; your voice [being that way] will become a habit.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 42); siingvallaghameng aleghqughaa ‘he talked to her in a harsh and loud way’"	сӣңвальяӷа-
siinqigute-	pos	IPA	to rinse	"amiirat uqiighluki aghvigluki alla siinqigulluki agaghtaqluki ‘remove the fat from the sealskins, then wash them, rinse them, and then hang them up’; siinqigutkaghqameng anigumeng ughugsighaqunga uygaaghmun ‘I am melting snow for rinsing the bleached sealskin’"	сӣңқигуты-
siinu	pos	IPA	"pantry; storeroom on either or both sides of the the insulated inner room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	сӣну
siipgaghte-	pos	IPA	to accidentally strip something off	kilillghan qaltenga iigganilnguq amigkun aagulluku siipgaghtaa ‘the scap on the cut on his hand got stripped off when he scrapped it on the door’	сӣпхаҳты-
siipneq	pos	IPA	excess; leftover	"this word is used in forming certain of the numerals, for example: qula ataasiq siipneqluku ‘eleven’ (literally, ‘ten with one left over’); qula maalghuk siipneqlukek ‘twelve’; qula pingayut siipneqluki ‘thirteen’; qula estamat siipneqluki ‘fourteen’; qula aghvinlek siipneqluku ‘sixteen’; qula maaghraghvinlek siipneqluku ‘seventeen’"	сӣпньық
siipngaan	pos	IPA	in abundance; enough to meet the need	"particle; qamughtekaghqaq quyngiq ulimaghtumakangant repall siipngaan ‘they domesticated reindeer as draft animals so much that they had an adundance’; siipngaan manilgukuvek tunaghhnakevnga ‘if you have enough eggs would you give me some’; siipngaan yaayasiiq ‘he is into mischief more than enough’; Akitulleghpigaat saam $60-mun kaatqaghlluteng. Qenghaghtut tamaakut entaqun $100 siipngaan wallu $75. ‘The highest price was in the $60 range. Blue fox [pelts] went as high as $100, or $75.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:174)"	сӣпңāн
siipngagh-	pos	IPA	to be in excess beyond …	Kingulighmi sukatkaagukut. Three hours siipngaqaghtekaqaghput. ‘The next time we went faster. It took us a little over three hours.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:202); Tagtalngi kiyang twenty feet siipngalghiit.  ‘They [the boats] were a bit over twenty feet in length.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:166)	сӣпңьаӷ-
siipniyug-	pos	IPA	to feel that something is sufficient; to feel superfluous	angyangituq siipniyugluni yugtuyata ‘he did not go boating [with them] when he realized that they had a sufficient crew [without him]’	сӣпьнюг-
siipte-	pos	IPA	to have something left over; to have an excess	"siiptuq ‘there is some left over from it’; siiptaa ‘he has some of it left over, he didn't use it all’ / siiputaa ‘he left some for her’"	сӣпты-
Siiqivak	pos	IPA	projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus near west end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Сӣқивак
siirgusiigh-	pos	IPA	to scramble eggs	"ayumighhaaneng tawaten gaaqat siirgusiighmeng atelget alngunak saam manigi ‘ever since long ago, they called this method of cooking of any sort of eggs “srambling”’; cf. sigiqe-"	сӣргусӣӷ-
siirgusiiq	pos	IPA	scrambled eggs	No information given.	сӣргусӣқ
siitghusiq	pos	IPA	awl	No information given.	сӣтҳусиқ
siivanlleq	pos	IPA	elder	siivanlleghet ‘elders’; cf. sivu	сӣванльық
sika	pos	IPA	cigar	also used in Chukotka	сика
sikaaq*	pos	IPA	smelt (Osmerus mordax); capelin or grunion (Mallotus villosus)	"exact identification undetermined; may in fact be pond smelt (Hypomesus olidus); sometimes called ""cigarfish"" in local English, probably from the Yupik name sikaaq sounding like English ""cigar"""	сикāқ
sikeriiq	pos	IPA	cigarette	also used in Chukotka	сикырӣқ
sikik	pos	IPA	arctic ground squirrel (Citellus parryi)	No information given.	сикик
siklaate-	pos	IPA	"to fall over or fall down (of a person, usually by tripping or slipping)"	"sikaatuq ‘he fell down’ / Mangteghanun kaanneghmini qagughmiguteghllagaqluni siklaalluni. ‘Whenever he would come to a house, he would fall over and bang his forehead.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:260)"	сиклья̄ты-
siklagh-	pos	IPA	to use a pick; to break through; to strike with tusks	ayveghet siklaghllagumakangat angyaq ‘the walruses had struck the boat with their tusks’	сикльяӷ-
siklaghaq	pos	IPA	small pick(axe)	No information given.	сикльяӷақ
siklapegtaq	pos	IPA	type of stitch	exact identification undetermined	сикльяпыхтақ
siklaq	pos	IPA	pick(axe); cocking piece or hammer of a gun	"siklaghniighaqut ‘they would use a pickaxe (to gather edible roots)’; qiinghutiluni piyaaniightem siklaghtaa suflugani ‘the hunter pointed his gun at the target, and pulled the trigger’"	сикльяқ
sikmuute-	pos	IPA	to lunge forward; to fall forward; to die (slang)	sikmuutuq ‘he lunged forward’ /	сикмӯты-
sikna-	pos	IPA	selfish; possessive; valuing; conserving	"emotional root; siknataghtuq ‘he's selfish or possessive’; siknayugtuq ‘he feels possessive of something’; siknakaa ‘he feels possessive of it, holds it dear’; siknanaghtuq ‘it is valuable’; siknanaq ‘valuable thing’; siknaketaq ‘selfish person’; siknaketiituq ‘he is unselfis’h; Unangegpenanga seghleghhalek ghhuughhaanka siknayagutanka. ‘I didn’t get a single seal and figured I should stop wasting my ammunition.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:154); cf. siiknegh-"	сикньа-
Sikneq	pos	IPA	Siknik Cape and Siknik Trapping Camp on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Сикньық
siku	pos	IPA	ice (either ocean or fresh water); the sea ice covering (or partially covering) the Bering Sea	"used in the dual, sikuk, for the ice on the sea, lake, etc.; see item 70 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	сику
siku-	pos	IPA	to get covered with ice; to freeze over	"sikuuq or sikwaa ‘it froze over, ice has formed on it’ / naayvaq sikuuq, uksaaqanga ‘it is fall time now so the lake is frozen’; sapeghhnameng aywaaneng anuqlighllagluni naayvaq sikwaa sukalluni ‘since the cold northwind blew so hard it caused the lake to freeze fast’; sikumaa meq unegna ‘the ocean has gotten covered with ice’; cf. sigugneq"	сику-
"sikughaaq, sikughwaaq"	pos	IPA	needlefish or stickleback (Pungitius pungitius)	No information given.	"сикуӷāқ, сикуӷӱāқ"
sikughlluggaq	pos	IPA	"smooth ice field, excellent for traveling"	No information given.	сикуҳльюхақ
sikughlluk	pos	IPA	thorn; quill	Taagken sikughllugtuqameng avayameng qaghpangllaghluku naasqwakun aatestekaat. ‘Then they made him put on his head a headdress of thorny branches (“crown of thorns”).’ (Matthew 27.29)	сикуҳльюк
sikughnaq	pos	IPA	icicle; sheet of ice hanging from edge of roof; ice formed by snow melting and refreezing in a crust	"may be used in dual, sikughnak, for one icicle; see item 72 in Oozeva et al. 2004"	сикуӷнақ
sikughpak	pos	IPA	large needle such as sail-making or upholstery needle	No information given.	сикуҳпак
sikulghutaq1	pos	IPA	needle case; sewing box	"used in the dual, sikulghutak, for one needlecase or sewing box"	сикулӷутақ1
Sikulghutaq2	pos	IPA	legendary expert seal hunter	No information given.	Сикулӷутақ2
sikuliiq	pos	IPA	new thin sheet of sea ice just moved in to land; water that froze on top of ice making the ice thicker	see item 73 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сикулӣқ
sikupik	pos	IPA	sheet of sea ice thick enough to walk on; regular ice	see item 74 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сикупик
sikuq*	pos	IPA	needle	sikghwa ‘her needle’	сикуқ
sikuqaaq	pos	IPA	small chunk or collection of small chunks of floating sea ice	No information given.	сикуқāқ
sikuqwaaghpak	pos	IPA	ice floe of medium size	see item 75 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сикуқӱāҳпак
sikuqwaaq	pos	IPA	small amount or expanse of ice; small or isolated ice floe	see item 76 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сикуқӱāқ
sikuvak	pos	IPA	large thick ice floe	see item 77 on  list in Oozeva et al. 2004	сикувак
sikwaavreghaq	pos	IPA	very thin ice; small piece of ice floating at sea	No information given.	сикӱāврыӷақ
silimuqa	pos	IPA	fresh fly-agaric; Amanita muscaria	No information given.	силимуқа
silimuqa-	pos	IPA	to poison	No information given.	силимуқа-
siluk	pos	IPA	feather	"silungestaq, silusquq, silusqughhaq or silengestaq ‘tiny feather’"	силюк
silunge-	pos	IPA	to become fully fledged (of bird)	No information given.	силюңы-
simigh-	pos	IPA	to change; to exchange; to replace	"simightuq ‘it changed or is changed’, ‘he changed his clothes’, ‘it got replaced’; simighaa ‘he changed it, replaced it’ / keneq simighaa ‘he changed the lightbulb’; atkuni simighaa ‘he changed his parka’"	симиӷ-
simiin	pos	IPA	replacement item; extra clothing	also simiita; = simiisiq	симӣн
simiisiq 	pos	IPA	replacement item; extra clothing	#NAME?	симӣсиқ
singagh-	pos	IPA	to kiss	Chukotkan	сиңаӷ-
singaghugh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly kiss	Chukotkan	сиңаӷуӷ-
Singhaq	pos	IPA	village site east of Sireniki (Sighinek) in Chukotka	see Map 1 in Appendices	Синӷақ
singig-	pos	IPA	to come to a point; be pointed	singigtuq ‘it is pointed’ / singigtaa ‘he made it pointed’	сиңиг-
singigh-	pos	IPA	to tie one's laces	singightuq ‘he tied his own laces’; singighaa ‘he tied his (another's) laces’ /	сиңиӷ-
singightuqaq	pos	IPA	strap attachment piece sewn in at welt of on skin-boot	No information given.	сиңиҳтуқақ
singigrakegte-	pos	IPA	to have a sharp point	No information given.	сиңигракыхты-
singigrewaaq	pos	IPA	narrow pointed knife	No information given.	сиңигрыӱāқ
singiimangilnguq*	pos	IPA	slovenly person; slob	Chukotkan (R); literally ‘one who hasn’t tied his shoe laces’	сиңӣмаңилңуқ
singik	pos	IPA	point; tip	sikuum singiga ‘the tip of the needle’	сиңик
singikrak	pos	IPA	"summit of mountain; top of tree, mountain, etc.; tip"	naaygham singikraga ‘the peak of the mountain’	сиңикшак
Singikrak	pos	IPA	Northwest Cape on St. Lawrence Is.	"literally, ‘small tip’; see Map 7 in Appendices"	Сиңикшак
singilpayug-	pos	IPA	to tuck the laces of one’s boots in the top of the boots (due to being in a hurry)	singilpayukiinaghluni aanuq taayughqem ‘he just tucked his laces in his boot because of being in a rush and went out’	сиңульпаюг-
singiq	pos	IPA	bootlace; shoelace	No information given.	сиңиқ
singlepegte-	pos	IPA	to limp	= senglepegte-	сиңлыпыхты-
sinit	pos	IPA	personally; independently; alone	particle; ; ellnga sinit kiyaghneghwaaquq (kiyaghtaquq) ‘he lives alone’; ellngan sinitkesimaa uqigtuqaq qepghaqaq ‘he personally worked on a heavy (hard) task’	синит
sipegte-	pos	IPA	"to strip the leaves from a stem; to remove liquid from an object (garment, skin, rope, etc.) by running it through the space between one's thumb and forefinger held together at the tips"	sipegtaa ‘he stripped it of leaves or liquid in this way’ / sipegmun ‘in a slipping or stripping way’	сипыхты-
sipelaaghaq	pos	IPA	pigeon guillemot (Cepphus columba) 	No information given.	сипыля̄ӷақ
Sipenpak	pos	IPA	Seepanpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Сипынпак
sipera	pos	IPA	zipper	No information given.	сипыра
sipetughii-	pos	IPA	to have a lot left over; to finish or arrive with time to spare	igleghalghiit aghneghmeng sipetughiigut takukameggnun kaalluteng ‘the travelers arrived at their destination with a lot of daylight still left’; nutaanllunguq unaghsimeng sipetughiimalghii mangteghangllalghii nunaaghmini ‘for the first time he had a lot of lumber left over when he was making a cabin at his camp’	сипытуӷӣ-
sipitek	pos	IPA	two related fish	Chukotkan (R); exact meaning undetermined	сипитык
sipsaq	pos	IPA	hip	No information given.	сипсяқ
siqagh-	pos	IPA	to remove the frilly sides of a certain kind of kelp	siqaghtuq ‘he removed the sides from kelp’; siqaghaa ‘he removed the sides from it’ /	сиқаӷ-
siqaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to accidently cut or scrape one’s hand or arm or the like	No information given.	сиқаӷаҳты-
siqallghaq	pos	IPA	rag used to wipe spills	"used in the plural, siqallghat, for one such rag; kuvulleq siqallghaneng sangighquumakanga ‘she wiped the spill with the rag’"	сиқальҳақ
siqfallag-	pos	IPA	to splash	"qagit angliyalghiimeng sama siqfallagaqut ‘since the waves got bigger, they are splashing down there’"	сиқфалхаг-
siqi-	pos	IPA	to splash on (him/it)	qaltak kuvqaghllukek aghnaghaghhaq siqii ‘she spilled the bucket of water and splashed on the little girl’	сиқи-
siqineghllugu-	pos	IPA	for it to be sunny	siqineghlluguuq ‘it is sunny’	сиқиныҳльюгу-
siqineq	pos	IPA	the sun	"siqineq nighugtuq ‘the sun is bright’; Siqineq piinneghani nanevgaat aanleghaataqut aghnalqwaaghet unegtaqut. ‘When the sun rises, the old men go out and the old women stay behind.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 48); Katam siqineq tevighyan mekelghiiq qemimeng ukigumalghii… . ‘When the sun set the boy went down the hill.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 161)"	сиқинық
siqinghuugh-	pos	IPA	to get sunny	No information given.	сиқинӷӯӷ-
siqinghwaaq	pos	IPA	glass; broken glass	sigiqelleq siqinghwaaq kiliisiqumakanga eflughwaaghluku ‘she got a cut from the broken glass when she ran her hand over it’	сиқинӷӱāқ
siqinitagha-	pos	IPA	to squint from the brightness of the sun	No information given.	сиқинитаӷа-
siqite-	pos	IPA	to splash (it) out	siqitaa ‘he splashed it out’ /	сиқиты-
siqlugaghqu-	pos	IPA	to take out meat from an underground cellar	"Ugingan pimakanga, ""Iyataghtunga, siqlugaghqu."" ‘He husband said to her, “I’m hungry, go get some meat from the cellar.”’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:20)"	сиқльюгаҳқу-
Siqlugaghyaget	pos	IPA	old village site in southern part of present-day Gambell	"literally, ‘numerous underground meat caches’; see Map 7 in Appendices; "	Сиқльюгаӷьягыт
siqlugaq	pos	IPA	underground meat cellar; hold of a ship	"Siqlugalwaaqsaghtukut, maaten siqlugapagiisimaaq. ‘We used to have underground meat cellars, but now the underground meat cellar is a thing of the past.’ (MRS. DELLA W. 10)"	сиқльюгақ
siqlugiigh-	pos	IPA	to take out special meat from the cellar  for a feast	No information given.	сиқльюгӣӷ-
siqlugiiqaq	pos	IPA	special meat stored in the cellar for a feast	No information given.	сиқльюгӣқақ
Siqlugmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	No information given.	Сиқлюгмӣ(т)
Siqluk	pos	IPA	former village on Yttygran Is. in Chukotkan and Yttygran Is. itself	see Map 3 in Appendices; cf. siqlugaq	Сиқльюк
siqni-	pos	IPA	to covet something; to be envious	"siqniiq ‘he covets something’, ‘he is envious’; siqnii ‘he covets it’ /"	сиқньи-
siqsimi-	pos	IPA	to refrain from doing something in hopes or with the expectation that another will do it; to leave a task for someone else	"sangwaa qepghaghyaghqaq siqsimim qenwat uglaghighllagtuq ‘the things to do became many on account of one’s waiting for someone to do them’; siqsimifqaafsi piighaghtaghaqitek ‘don’t wait for someone (else) to do it, (youpl) do it immediately’; siqsimim qenwat uglaaghighllagtuq sangwaa qepghaghyaghqaq ‘on account of waiting for someone else to do it, the work has piled up’"	сиқсими-
Siquvek	pos	IPA	Seakoovook Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Сиқувык
siraq	pos	IPA	tip of harpoon	Chukotkan (R)	сирақ
sisaawi-	pos	IPA	to sense; to surmise; to understand	sisaawiiq ‘he sensed something’ /	сися̄ӱи-
sisaawike-	pos	IPA	to figure (it) out; to sense (it); to surmise concerning (it)	sisaawikaa ‘he figured it out’	сися̄ӱикы-
sisaawiketagh-	pos	IPA	to be quick-witted; to be perceptive	No information given.	сися̄ӱикытаӷ-
sisaawisaghagh-	pos	IPA	to give hints	No information given.	сися̄ӱисаӷаӷ-
sisela	pos	IPA	chisel	Chukotkan	сисыля
siseru	pos	IPA	sausage of reindeer gut filled with fat	No information given.	сисыру
sitegh-	pos	IPA	to patch a skin boat	siitghaa ‘he patched it’ /	ситыӷ-
siteguq	pos	IPA	sinew from front leg of reindeer	Chukotkan (R)	ситыкуқ
siteq	pos	IPA	patch on skin boat	siitgha ‘its patch’	ситық
sitevaq	pos	IPA	raw sea mammal meat eaten with plant roots and blubber	sitevat pinilghiit kuyagem kemekragi samun tangimun ‘meat from the upper part of the backbone of seal is good to be eaten raw with plant roots and blubber’	ситывақ
sitiiwen	pos	IPA	with certainty; as compensation	particle	ситӣӱын
Sitilaq	pos	IPA	Siteeluk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ситиляқ
sivaaghtuqaq	pos	IPA	squirrel	No information given.	сивāҳтуқақ
sivaaq	pos	IPA	molar	No information given.	сивāқ
Sivaaq	pos	IPA	Sevak Camp on St. Lawrence Is.	"see Map 6 in Appendices; used in the plural, Sivaaghet, for the surrounding around"	Сивāқ
sivillagte-	pos	IPA	to splash (it)	qaltak meghmeng imalgek kuufqaghllukek kameraaghqek sivillagtaak ‘she accidentally spilled the bucket of water and splashed on his shoes’; mekelghiighhaak pugimaallghiik nenglaasimaagmek sivillagtaghtuk ‘the little boys that are swimming are laughing splashing about’	сивильяхты-
sivu	pos	IPA	front; bow of boat; time before; face of something	angyam sivunga ‘the front of the boat’; sivungani ‘before it’	сиву
sivug-	pos	IPA	head tilted up	postural root; sivugtuq ‘he tilted up his (own) head’; sivugtaa ‘he tilted up his (another's) head’; sivugngaaq ‘he has his head tilted up’	сивуг-
sivugh-	pos	IPA	to wring out	sivughaa ‘he wrung it out’ / sivughiiq ‘he wrung out something’; siqallghani sivughaa ‘she wrung out her washrag’	сивуӷ-
sivughaq	pos	IPA	edible plant stored in oil for winter	Chukotkan; exact identification not known	сивуӷақ
sivughisiq	pos	IPA	wringer	"used in the dual, sivughisik, for one wringer (with its two rollers)"	сивуӷисиқ
Sivughqa	pos	IPA	site east of Cape Stoletiia in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Сивуҳқа
Sivugnaa	pos	IPA	Seevoonah Mt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Сивугнā
Sivugnaq	pos	IPA	site on the coast east of Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Сивугнақ
sivuke-	pos	IPA	"to do, be or occur first"	"usually used in the subordinative agreeing in regard to transitivity with the main verb;  Sivukluku Ayngera ugiksaqanga, Paallengetaq panikluku. ‘First she had a husband, Ayngera, and Paallengetaq was their daughter.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:20); Sivukluninguq Tapghukun nelikaaftuq. ‘First, they say, he made his home at Tapghuq.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:26); Kiinghagu, sivukluteng kiiwet pingaghtuutaqut. ‘Whenever it was summer, first the rivers would all melt.’ (MRS. DELLA W. 6); Enkaam sivukluku Ungazighmiim nelikaqsaqanga maana Sivungaq, Mayukaam. ‘And first to settle in Savoonga was the Siberian, Mayukaq.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:2); Sivukeghpigaghlunga liisalghiinga …. ‘When became aware of things for the very first time ….’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:130)"	сивукы-
sivukun	pos	IPA	at first	particle	сивукун
sivulii-	pos	IPA	to be the first one	sivuliiguq ‘he is the first one’ /	сивулӣ-
Sivulin	pos	IPA	projection of land into lagoon from barrier isthmus toward east end of Koozata Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Сивулин
Sivuliq aghneq	pos	IPA	Sunday	"so called because Sunday is the first day of the week; Sivulighpigaghmi aghneghani santillghem, unaangupiglluku, …. ‘Very early on Sunday morning, ….’ (Luke 24.1)"	Сивулиқ аӷнық
sivuliq*	pos	IPA	first one; front; one before; predecessor	taam qikmim sivulii qilugyuneghtuyaghtuq ‘the one coming in front of that dog barks a lot’; qikmighaghhaam itegaan siulii qateghtut ‘the puppy’s front paws are white’	сивулиқ
sivullagh-	pos	IPA	to go ahead of time	No information given.	сивульяӷ-
sivullaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to lead; to be the leader	No information given.	сивульяҳқуӷ-
sivullgaagh-	pos	IPA	to go ahead of others	"esavghalghiit angyat angyallightengit sivullgaaghaqut ‘when crews pull their boats on ice, the captain is in front of the boat’"	сивульхāӷ-
sivullgaagh-	pos	IPA	to start out before the others	No information given.	сивульхāӷ-
sivullgaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to interrupt others talking	No information given.	сивульхаҳтаӷ-
sivullughquun	pos	IPA	food that is eaten first; first course at a meal	"neghnaqelghiini sivukluki neghyaghqat maghyaghqelliitmeng nalighmen sivullughquutmeng aatqelghiit ‘at meal time, the food that is eaten first is called the “lead course” or the “first course”’"	сивульюҳқӯн
Sivulqut	pos	IPA	Cape Sivolkut in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Сивульқут
sivuneq	pos	IPA	ancestor; predecessor; previous times	sivunghi ‘his ancestors’ or ‘his predecessors’; … sivunghet tuqlughaqluki tagilaghaatesqelluki kenghem asinganun neghesnaqniluki eghqwaaghaqegkangit.  ‘… they called to the ancestors (in the nether world) telling them to underneath the fire so that they could feed them in ceremony of making food offerings.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:242); sivunghani ‘in previous times’	сивунық
Sivungaq*	pos	IPA	Savoonga	Sivungaghmi ‘at Savoonga’; Sivungaghmiit ‘the people of Savoonga’; see Map 5 in Appendices	Сивуңақ
sivungigh-	pos	IPA	to get ahead of	ivaghiniightem sivungiimaa nanevgaq yuliimaa pinilghii anglu ‘the hunter got ahead of the old man and took the good fishing hole’	сивуңиӷ-
sivungiite-	pos	IPA	to get to (it) ahead of others	tepaq sivungiitaa qaviitutmineng ‘he got to the edible sealife that had drifted onto the seashore ahead of the others since he wakes up early’; nunavaget sivungiitiit sukatutmeggneng ‘they got to the walruses on the ice ahead of the others due to their speed’	сивуңӣты-
Sivuqaa	pos	IPA	Northeast Cape on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Сивуқā
Sivuqaan	pos	IPA	Camp Kulowiye and Seevookhan Mt. at the eastern end of St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Сивуқāн
Sivuqaq	pos	IPA	Gambell; St. Lawrence Island	"Sivuqami ‘at Gambell’ or ‘at St. Lawrence Is.’; Sivuqaghmiit or Sivuqaghhmiit ‘the people of Gambell’ or ‘St. Lawrence Islanders’; Sivuqagh(h)miitestun ‘in the language of St. Lawrence Island’ or ‘in the dialect of St. Lawrence Island (as opposed to Chukotka)’; Qiighqaq esghaqaaluni llangaqa qetkaq inglupigaghmeng iiggmeng, enkaam aatqaa Sivuqaq, Ulimaghistem sivuqaa. The Island looks as if it had been squeezed with one hand, and it has the name “Sivuqaq”, the one wrung out by the Creator.’ (KALLAG. 8); see Map 7 in Appendices"	Сивуқақ
sivuqliq*	pos	IPA	first one; front one; neighbor	No information given.	сивуқльиқ
sivutmun	pos	IPA	frontwards; foreward	No information given.	сивутмун
sivuughagh-	pos	IPA	to feel overwhelmed; to feel hesitant; to be apprehensive; to feel defeated	"sivuughaghtuq ‘he feels he cannot go on’ / sivuughaatkaa or sivuughaasiqaa ‘he feels he cannot go on because of it, with it, or for her’; Sivuughaqestaghngaamkun quyngiqa naavyighnayukan pingayiitaqa. ‘Even though I was hesitant about it fearing that my reindeer might get tired out, I put a third load on them.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:78); sivuughaghnaq ‘a person or thing that makes one feel that he cannot proceed as one would like, such as a sick person who shouldn’t be left alone’"	сивӯӷаӷ-
sivuyagta	pos	IPA	striker; man at bow of boat who spots and spears game; harpooner	No information given.	сивуяхта
sivuyak	pos	IPA	"bow, specifically of boat"	No information given.	сивуяк
"siwaaru, siwaaraaq"	pos	IPA	gray; grayish red	"Chukotkan; Quyaaq Ukaziq. Taagken kenlanga Ukazim simighaqaa melquni: uksumi – qateghtaqaa, kiigmi – siwaaghungughtaqaa. ‘Hare was happy. From then on Hare would change his fur: in winter he’d become white, and in summer he’d become grayish red.’ (AANGHHAQ 37)"	"сигӱāру, сигӱāрāқ"
suflitagh-	pos	IPA	lying on stomach	"postural root; suflitaghtuq ‘he lay down on his stomach’; suflitaghtaa ‘he lay her on her stomach’; suflitaghngaaq ‘he is lying on his stomach’; Taagken kaallutek esghaamakangak suflitaghmi. ‘Then, when they2 arrived, lying on her stomach she saw them2.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 73)"	сюфльитаӷ-
suflitaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to lie around on one’s stomach	No information given.	сюфльитаҳтаӷ-
"suflu, sufluq"	pos	IPA	tube; cavity; cave	"suflunga or suflaa ‘its tube, cavity’; Sukilpaat suflumi ighnikayuget. ‘Auklets lay eggs in the cavities between rocks.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 153); cf. sufluk"	сюфлью; сюфльюқ
suflugagh-	pos	IPA	to shoot (a gun)	Chukotkan (R)	суфльюгаӷ-
suflugaghwaaq	pos	IPA	pistol	No information given.	сюфльюгаӷӱāқ
suflugaq	pos	IPA	gun; rifle	No information given.	сюфльюгақ
suflughtaq	pos	IPA	blue king crab (Paralithodes platypus)	No information given.	сюфльюҳтақ
suflugpak	pos	IPA	horn (as of a car); factory whistle	Chukotkan (R); = seflugpak	суфльюхпак
suflugrak	pos	IPA	tube; gun barrel; pipe (for liquid); hose	No information given.	сюфльюграк
sufluk	pos	IPA	chimney; stovepipe	"Suflugkat sangwaat, egllukaghqameng Pedersen tagitkayugulghii saagngalghiimeng, galvanize-et sangwaat egllukaghqaghllaget entaqun whaten plywood-estun angkalghiit. ‘Petersen brough material for stovepipes and stoves, galvanized sheets the size of a piece of plywood.’(SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:70); cf. suflu"	сюфльюк
suflungumalghii	pos	IPA	cavity in tooth	No information given.	сюфльюңумалӷӣ
sufluqaghte-	pos	IPA	to pierce through	"maklak naasqwakun guulluku, sufluqaghsimalghii ghhuuq ‘he shot the bearded seal on the head, and the bullet went all the way through’; = sefluqaghte-"	суфльюқаҳты-
sugag-	pos	IPA	to feel offended	sugagtuq’ he felt offened’ / sugagtestaa ‘he offended her’; sugakaa ‘he felt offended on account of it or for him’	сюгаг-
sugake-	pos	IPA	to feel offended on account of (it) or for (him)	sugakaa ‘he feels offended on account of it or for him’ /	сюгакы-
sugenreq	pos	IPA	strong current	"Seghleghhalek seghleghunaqukut, ingavek atneghaanun lliiqumta sugenreghmun, ukut nayumta unilleqiinkut. ‘It’s going to be bad for us if we get into the strong current at the cape, as those [ice floes protecting us] will go away from us.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:122)"	сугынрық
suggutaq	pos	IPA	strap for dragging dead animals	Chukotkan (R)	сюхутақ
sughma	pos	IPA	chess; checkers	No information given.	сюӷма
sughma-	pos	IPA	to play chess or checkers	No information given.	сюӷма-
sughmavik	pos	IPA	checkerboard patterned cloth or other surface; plaid	No information given.	сюӷмавик
Sughmeghaat	pos	IPA	Soomeghat on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Сюӷмыӷāт
sughmeghaq	pos	IPA	red phalarope (Phalaropus fulicarius)	No information given.	сюӷмыӷақ
sughmetku-	pos	IPA	to fix rough spots on a reindeer skin after tanning it	Chukotkan (R)	сюӷмытку-
sughraaghwtaq	pos	IPA	shooting star (a flowering plant)(Dodecatheon fridgidum)	No information given.	сюӷрāӱӷтақ
sughu	pos	IPA	woman's wind-parka made of dried walrus gut decorated with reddened strips of unborn seal skin	"used in the plural, sughut, or dual, sughuk, for one such wind-parka"	сюӷу
sughug-	pos	IPA	to attack (of animals or people); to chase; to charge	sughugtuq (or sughugiiq) ‘it attacked someone’; sughugaa ‘it attacked him’ / kayngeghllagem sughugtughaa ‘a great big brown bear chased after him’	сюӷуг-
sughukaq	pos	IPA	guest at festival; attacker	Chukotkan (V&E)	сюӷукақ
sugighpagtagh-	pos	IPA	to develop red blotches due to emotion (of face)	sugagniighem repall gginaa sugighpagtaghtuq ‘he got so offended that his face developed red blotches’	сюгиҳпахтаӷ-
sugllekegte-	pos	IPA	"to slightly hit, touch or scratch; to graze (of thrown thing)"	taghnughhaat milughmigulluteng naasqwakun sugllekegtemmeng miluumakanga uyghagmeng ‘the children were throwing rocks at each other and one was grazed on his head’; llaaghinaannguq sugllekegtemmeng unakumaa ‘good thing he hit it slightly’	сюхльыкыхты-
sugri-	pos	IPA	to get discolored (red or blue) around the mouth due to cold	No information given.	сюгри-
sugriitaan	pos	IPA	additional strap on boot (the loop for it is sewn on the front part of the sole)	Chukotkan (R)	сугрӣтāн
sugrugiitaq	pos	IPA	dog muzzle	No information given.	сюгругӣтақ
sugrugmighqu-	pos	IPA	to poke in the snout	Chukotkan (R)	сугругмиҳқу-
sugrugta	pos	IPA	bridle	Chukotkan (R)	сугрухта
sugrugtaq	pos	IPA	one with a long muzzle; animal with a long snout; person with a long nose	Chukotkan (R)	сугрухтақ
sugruk	pos	IPA	beak; bill; snout	sugrugek ‘beak or snout including lower and upper parts’; qikmim sugrugmineng tenpaaqwaanga aanaluni ‘the dog nudged me with its snout when it wanted to go out’	сюгрук
sugtuvak	pos	IPA	whimbrel (Numenius phaeopus)	No information given.	сюхтувак
sugugte-	pos	IPA	to go ashore; to stop ashore when traveling by boat	"Taakwagun suguglluteng, yugita angaghqughaqegkangit. ‘After they went ashore the men would take [their things up].’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:40)"	сюгюхты-
sugukelengiiq1	pos	IPA	mosquito	"cf. sugukelengiiq2, which may actaually be the same word with a figurative meaning "	сюгукылыңӣқ1
sugukelengiiq2	pos	IPA	"temporary tent made from oars covered with skins, used by boat travelers when caught in a storm"	"cf. sugukelengiiq1, which may actually be the same word with its literal meaning "	сюгукылыңиқ2
sugupak	pos	IPA	nostril area of animal (especially sea mammal); upper lip area extending to the nostrils	"Uka mayughlaataghtuq, nuuglaataghaa sugupagem. ‘It came up; the nostrils of a sea mammal [a seal] poked through again.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 86)"	сугупак
sugute-	pos	IPA	to put boat up on land or ice for a little while traveling 	Sivungaghtat angyat taakwani tumemi Tapghukun sugugtut ‘the boat going to Savoonga stopped at Tapghuk for a little while on the way’	сюгуты-
suka-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > sukaghhalek, sukaghi-, sukaghllak, sukalqaq, sukangiite-, sakangite-, sukate-, sukera-"	сюка-
sukaghhalek	pos	IPA	so fast!	exclamatory particle	сюкаҳалык
sukaghi-	pos	IPA	to become fast	sukaghiiq ‘he/it became fast’ / Llaaghanwha sukaghimalghii saama iknaqughimalghii. ‘Consequently he had become fast and strong.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 67)	сюкаӷи-
sukaghllak	pos	IPA	very fast thing	Tengegkayugem veghakek uzivlutek sukaghllaguuk. ‘The airplane’s propellers turn fast.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 174)	сюкаҳльяк
sukallaagh-	pos	IPA	to tell one to hurry	"angyaghnaqelghiit yugteng sukallaaghaat kinguqaataqnayukangisteng ‘when the boat was about to go out, they told one of their crew members to hurry so they won’t be late for the game’"	сюкальāӷ-
sukalqaq	pos	IPA	fast runner	No information given.	сюкальқақ
sukanghagh-	pos	IPA	to race; to speed along; to rush	Chukotkan (R); ellnga sukanghaghaquq llangaqa ‘he seems to be rushing along’	сюканӷаӷ-
sukangiite-	pos	IPA	to slow down	"sukangiituq ‘it is slowing down, has slowed down’ /"	сюкаңӣты-
sukangite-	pos	IPA	to be slow	sukangituq ‘it is slow’ / sukangilluni (or sukangunani) ‘being slow’)	сюкаңиты-
sukate-	pos	IPA	to go or be fast	sukatuq ‘it/he is going fast’ or ‘he does things fast’/ sukalnguq ‘the fast one’; sukallghat ‘the fastest of them’	сюкаты-
sukera-	pos	IPA	to hurry; to be going very fast	"sukeraaq ‘he is hurrying ‘/ Naayvamun sukeraaqukut atghiinemta, nenglaamaamta, ilaagaamaamta, … ‘We would go faster and faster down to the lake, laughing and singing, …” (KALLAGNEGHET 40)"	сюкыра-
sukeraragkiigh-	pos	IPA	to go extremely fast	No information given.	сюкырарахкӣӷ-
sukilpaq*	pos	IPA	crested auklet (Aethia cristatella)	sukilpaat ‘crested auklets’	сюкильпақ
sukite-	pos	IPA	to get a splinter in one's flesh	sukituq ‘he got a splinter’ /	сюкиты-
sukitun	pos	IPA	splinter	No information given.	сюкитун
suklugraq	pos	IPA	parakeet auklet (Cyclorrhynchus psittacula)	No information given.	сюкльюграқ
suksugtaq	pos	IPA	primus or similar pressure stove	"used in the dual, suksugtak, for one stove"	сюксюхтақ
suksuk	pos	IPA	grating or hissing noise as of waves on gravel beach	No information given.	сюксюк
sulaawi-	pos	IPA	to be fatigued from lack of rest or from strenuous work; to get tired	"qavapanghitem sulaawiiq ‘he felt fatigued from lack of sleep’; qepghaqani sulaawinapiggniiqaa uqigtuqameng kevaghqu ‘he says his job made him fatigued from lifting things’; sulaawiyami meghnaaliiq ‘when he got tired, he rested’"	сюля̄ӱи-
Sulaay	pos	IPA	Independence Day (4th of July)	No information given.	Сюлāӥ
sulemsa	pos	IPA	elderly disabled person	Chukotkan (R)	сюлымся
sulleve-	pos	IPA	to tear further; to unravel; to come undone at seam	cf. sumlleghaghte-; qulliraaghem segesqwan piillgha wata sullevuq ‘the tear on the pants knee is getting ever larger’	сюльывы-
sullevneghhalek	pos	IPA	so inconsiderate!	No information given.	сюльывныҳалык
sullevneq	pos	IPA	mischievous person; one who hurts others through sorcery; inconsiderate person	cf. sulleve-	сюльывнық
sullevniqe-	pos	IPA	to be mischievous; to be destructive	No information given.	сюльывниқы-
sulughhaghte-	pos	IPA	to whip	No information given.	сюлюҳаҳты-
sulugtagh-	pos	IPA	for wind to howl (especially blowing through cracks)	sulugtaghtuq ‘the wind howled (through the cracks)’	сюлюхтаӷ-
suluk	pos	IPA	sound or noise of wind (blowing through cracks)	No information given.	сюлюк
sulungaq	pos	IPA	crest on auklet	used for parka decoration	сюлюңақ
"sumae, sumeq"	pos	IPA	idea; thought	sumemni ‘in my thinking’	"сюмаы, сумық"
Sumeghaat	pos	IPA	Soomeghat Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Сумыӷāт
sumeghiighte-	pos	IPA	to worry	sumeghiightuq ‘he is worried’ /	сюмыӷӣҳты-
sumeghmike-	pos	IPA	to think about; to have (it) on one's mind	"sumeghmikaa ‘he has it on his mind, in his thoughts’ /"	сюмыӷмикы-
sumeghmiqe-	pos	IPA	to cause (him) to worry	No information given.	сюмыӷмиқы-
sumeghneq	pos	IPA	thought; idea	No information given.	сюмыӷнық
sumeghniqe-	pos	IPA	to think about something; to try to figure something out	sumeghniquq ‘he thought and thought about something’ /	сюмыӷниқы-
sumeghtaghagh-	pos	IPA	to think	sumeghtaghaghtuq ‘he thought’ / sumeghtaghaatkaa ‘he thought about it’; sameng sumeghtaghaghaqsin? ‘what are you thinking (about)?’; sumeghtaghaghaqunga pinighniluku ‘I think it is good’	сюмыҳтаӷаӷ-
sumeghte-	pos	IPA	to worry; to be concerned; to plan to do something about the object of one's worry; to try to decide	"sumeghtuq ‘he is worried’, ‘he is trying to decide’ / suumghutkaa ‘he is concerned about it, thinking seriously concerning it’; sumeghtuq kiikun Sivuqaghhnaluni ‘she though seriously about going to Gambell this coming summer’"	сюмыҳты-
sumeghyali-	pos	IPA	to have a lot on one's mind; to worry	"sumeghyaliiq ‘he has a lot on his mind’, ‘he is worrying’ / sumeghyalitkaa ‘he is seriously thinking about it’"	сюмыӷьяли-
sumlleghaghte-	pos	IPA	to split (especially along a seam)	sumlleghaghtuq ‘it split’; sumlleghaghtaa ‘he split it’ / cf. sulleve-	сюмльыӷаҳты-
"suna1, sunami"	pos	IPA	suddenly; unexpectedly	"particle; iiskughtaqaghut kaatelgheghqaa sunami taana aliighwaaghta aagken ‘we were watching for his arrival when suddenly we saw him coming from the other direction’; Aghnaghaghhaq mengteghami iitughumalmaluku suna iitghaghsimalghii qawaamsighaq. ‘When the little girl was inside the house, unexepectedly a little birdie suddenly came in.’ (AANGHHAQ 29)"	"сюна1, сюнами"
suna2	pos	IPA	soil; dirt; earth	"cf. nuna; Aaneqeghlluni, aglaamaluni riigteminun, aqsamuggaa sunam nevegllagumakanga. ‘After he suddenly went out, while he was going home to his den, the soil clung in a major way to his little belly.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG.  13)"	сюна2
sunanguq	pos	IPA	I hope so	particle	сюнаңуқ
sungaghaghqwaa-	pos	IPA	to blush	No information given.	сюңаӷаҳқӱā-
sungaghate-	pos	IPA	to be rosy-cheeked	No information given.	сюңаӷаты-
sungaghni	pos	IPA	bitter taste	No information given.	сюңаӷни
sungaghteqe-	pos	IPA	"to redden from embaressment, rage, or exertion"	sungaghtequq ‘he became red’ / sungaghteqestaa ‘he made her get red with embaressment or rage’; usuqluku sungaghteqestaa ‘he got her red by praising her’	сюңаҳтықы-
sungaghwaaq	pos	IPA	breastbone	cf. sungaq	сюңаӷӱāқ
sungaghyaak	pos	IPA	greenish or bluish color or thing	No information given.	сюңаӷья̄к
sungaghyug-	pos	IPA	to be bluish or greenish in color	No information given.	сюңаӷьюг-
sungaghyuk	pos	IPA	blue color or thing; green color or thing	No information given.	сюңаӷьюк
sungaghyukegte-	pos	IPA	to be bright blue or green	No information given.	сюңаӷьюкыхты-
sungalghutaq	pos	IPA	bead container	"used in the dual, sungalghutak, for one bead container"	сюңалӷутақ
sungamteqe-	pos	IPA	"to redden from embaressment, rage, or exertion"	kayngumiqluni sungamtequq ‘she became red from embarassment’ 	сюңамтықы-
sungaq*	pos	IPA	bile; bead; beaded necklace	"probably originally bile, with the bead meaning coming from the bluish color of (early) trade beads; sungaanka ‘my beaded necklace’"	сюңақ
sungaqeltaghaq	pos	IPA	shot (as used in shotgun); small bead	Chukotkan (R)	сюңақыльтаӷақ
sungghanagh-	pos	IPA	to do things fast; to be frenetic	"sungghanalghiit yuget qepghaghtet pinilghiit ‘people who work fast are good’; qikmiinguq sivukluni sungghanaghqwaaluni suumumalghii ‘his dog first became frenetic, and then it got rabid’"	сюңӷанаӷ-
sungghanagh-	pos	IPA	to be full of energy; to be excited and ready to act	"Qiinghaghsalghiimi imani sungghanaghtuq ""Aglaghtuunnaqukut!"" ‘When he looked in he was jaunty (saying), “We’re going home!” (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:42); sungghaniquq ‘he’s acting (or acted) energetically’"	сюңӷанаӷ-
sungghanaq	pos	IPA	"active, energetic person"	No information given.	сюңӷанақ
sunggharuug-	pos	IPA	to become very active	cf. sungghanagh-	сюңӷарӯг-
sungite-	pos	IPA	to feel bitter (including both emotionally and physically as when one tastes something bitter)	No information given.	сюңиты-
sunglug-	pos	IPA	to fold or bend in as in forming an indentation; to cave in	"sunglugtuq ‘it folded in’, ‘it caved in’ / sunglugtaa ‘he folded or bent it in’; sunglugtestaa ‘he made it fold or bend in’"	сюңлюг-
sungyuk1	pos	IPA	noise or sound of wind or water; roaring sound; whistling sound made by one breathing loudly in sleep	No information given.	сюңьюк1
sungyuk2	pos	IPA	wake left on surface of water	Chukotkan (R)	сюңьюк2
supag-	pos	IPA	tilted; slanted; leaning; at an angle	"postural root; mayughaatak supagmun ayaqighllutek ayuquk ‘the ladder is slanted against something’; naparakeggtepigtuk yeghrat supagtaghaghqek ‘it is too vertical, you should put it more at an angle’"	сюпаг-
supaqak	pos	IPA	pants of reindeer skin with the fur out	Chukotkan (R); this is a dual; the singular would be supuqaq	сюпақак
supe-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > suupe-, supelghaq, supugh-, supuk"	сюпы-
supeg-	pos	IPA	to shoot repeatedly	"nunavaget kaalluki supegyaqmegteki nutem qafsinat unegtiit ‘they got to a herd of walrus on the ice and left a few of them when they shot repeatedly at them’; ilangita angyat suupgitgun ateghaatut ‘even though the other boat shot repeatedly at them, they all got away’"	сюпыг-
supelghagh-	pos	IPA	to partially dry in the breeze; air out	"supelghaghtuq ‘it is drying, or it dried, in the breeze’; supelghaghaa ‘it (wind) is drying it, or dried, it’ /"	сюпылӷаӷ-
supelghaq	pos	IPA	breeze	No information given.	сюпылӷақ
supug-	pos	IPA	to be drafty	No information given.	сюпуг-
supugh-	pos	IPA	to blow repeatedly or constantly	No information given.	сюпуӷ-
supughaate-	pos	IPA	to blow away a hurt	"when a child (especially) gets hurt, an adult may inhale the “hurt” and blow it out into the air saying ‘ufaay’; tagi supughaallakun ‘come, let me blow it (the hurt) away’"	сюпуӷāты-
supughragh-	pos	IPA	to blow repeatedly	No information given.	сюпуӷраӷ-
supughraq	pos	IPA	harmonica	"used in the dual, supughrak, for one harmonica"	сюпуӷрақ
supuk	pos	IPA	draft (as of cold air)	No information given.	сюпук
suqaghnalke-	pos	IPA	to run over with a sled	No information given.	сюқаӷналькы-
suqaghneghqaq	pos	IPA	"sled runner material, traditionally baleen (also walrus tusk or hardwood)"	No information given.	сюқаӷныҳқақ
suqaghneq	pos	IPA	sled runner base	No information given.	сюқаӷнық
suqaq*	pos	IPA	baleen	"Tamaani salin qawaagniighusiq allgeghlaallghilluku neghighluku tamakut atughaqegkangit negaghat, suqaghmeng ulimaaghet metghaghmun atut. ‘At that time there weren’t many shotguns around so they’d use snares made of baleen to catch eiders.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:140); Tamaani pingwaaghhiinaat aklungillghi … America-m angyaghpaganeng tukfighikayuget, suqaghmeng, tugutmeng kaanneghata tespamavek. ‘At that time only the well to do were able to carry on trade in baleen and ivory with American ships whenever they  came.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:200); cf. suughqaq"	сюқақ
suqi-	pos	IPA	to remove the baleen from a whale	salin suqingigataat ‘they haven’t removed the baleen yet’; suqiluteng nengiitut ‘they took off the baleen and divided everything among the crews’	сюқи-
Suqitughnak	pos	IPA	river that flows out near Qitnegaq Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Сюқитуӷнак
suqlak	pos	IPA	Alpine bistort (Polygonum viviparum) ; pink plumes (Polygonum bistorta)	refers especially to the edible root	сюқльяк
suqlamengestaq	pos	IPA	pink plumes or bistort (Polygonum bistorta)	No information given.	сюқльямыңыстақ
suqlawaaq	pos	IPA	common bistort (Polygonum viviparum L.) 	No information given.	сюқльяӱāқ
suqlugh-	pos	IPA	crumpled; folded in to narow an opening; bent	"postural root; suqlughtuq ‘it got bent’; suqlughtaa ‘he bent it’; suqlughngaaq ‘it is bent’; Tamaa copper-et, legan taakwavek suqlughlluki, wayameng sameng, wayaghtuftuqlu copper-meng tamaa. Sufluget taaqiit. ‘There was copper [sheeting] there, and so [they] bent it around, and bound it with some sort of wire, copper wire. They finished the stove pipes [that way].’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:166)"	сюқльюӷ-
suqlughneq	pos	IPA	bend (bent thing or area)	No information given.	сюқльюӷнық
suqluneq	pos	IPA	canyon; gully	"used in the dual, suqlunghek, for one canyon or gully; Yataaghqelluni estuyalghiimi anigukun suqlunghegnekun taakwagun meghmun agigngalghiignekun. ‘After getting ready he slid down on the snow down the gully that led to the water.’ (KALLAG. 19); = suqlunqaq"	сюқльюнық
suqlunqaq	pos	IPA	canyon; gully	"used in the dual, suqlunqak, for one canyon or gully; = suqluneq"	сюқльюнқақ
suqsuq	pos	IPA	sound or noise of splashing or gurgling of water	naaptaq iqalluk suqsughtaghtuq ‘the fish that was caught in the net is splashing around’; kiiyeghwaaghem suqsukek nagaqughagka ‘I hear the gurgling of the stream’	сюқсюқ
suug-	pos	IPA	person	"root; > suuglliqe-, suuglluk; cf. yuk"	сю̄г-
suugerngae	pos	IPA	"curtain partitioning off the aagra (q.v.), the insulated inner room in the mangteghapik (q.v.), the traditional dome-shaped house"	made of tanned caribou or reindeer hide	сю̄гырңаы
suugh-	pos	IPA	to be murky; to be muddy (of water); to be strong (of tea or coffee); to be off-white in color	"suughtuq ‘it is murky’, ‘it is off white’ / suuqan ‘if it is murky’"	сю̄ӷ-
suughaq*	pos	IPA	blueberry (Vaccinium uliginosum)	No information given.	сю̄ӷақ
suughite-	pos	IPA	to be clear; to be weak (of tea)	No information given.	сю̄ӷиты-
suughmelnguq*	pos	IPA	muddy or murky water; cloudy liquid	No information given.	сю̄ӷмылңуқ
suughneghiite-	pos	IPA	to turn pale	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	сю̄ӷныӷӣт-
suughpagte-	pos	IPA	to suddenly become dark or murky (especially of liquid); to change color; to became spotted or stained	No information given.	сю̄ҳпахты-
suughqaq*	pos	IPA	edible cartiledge-like layer at the base of the baleen of the lower jaw near the gums; “oyster” (so-called) of baleen	"Taawa suqaat, ….  Akiksaghtughaqeftiit tawaqalegnun. Talwa suughqalegllaget. ‘And baleen, … they evidentally traded them for tobacco. And also there was lots of baleen “oyster” (for eating).’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:124); cf. suqaq"	сю̄ҳқақ
suughte-	pos	IPA	to darken or become murky; to become off-white in color; to get strong (of tea or coffee)	"suughtekan ‘if/when it gets murky’ or ‘when it (tea, coffee) gets strong’; meghtaghvigem megha suughtaa ‘the well water is getting murky’; qateghrakegtak ggaatkek suughtaak ‘her white blouse is getting yellowish’; angyam piingha qateghrakegtaq suughtaa ‘the white paint on the boat is getting grayish’; uygaaqa suughtaa ‘my bleached seal-skin is becoming off-white’"	сю̄ҳты-
suughuute-	pos	IPA	to stir up sediment in a liquid	No information given.	сю̄ӷӯты-
suuglliqe-	pos	IPA	to get frustrated and show ones anger	No information given.	сю̄хльиқы-
suugllug-	pos	IPA	to be irritable; to be in a bad mood; to get angry easily	mekelghiiq suuglliqelghii igaghvigmeng aanesimakangat ‘they had the boy who was irritable leave the school’	сю̄хльуг-
suuglluk	pos	IPA	"one who gets frustrated, angered or offended easily and readily shows his anger; irascible person"	No information given.	сю̄хльюк
suuk	pos	IPA	small strap of baleen fastened to harpoon	exact identificationundetermined; suuga ‘its strap’	сю̄к
suulqu	pos	IPA	type of ring seal (Phoca hispida)	Chukotkan (R); exact identification undetermined; said to be a small grey ringed seal	сю̄льқу
suulya	pos	IPA	soldier	No information given.	сю̄лья
suuma	pos	IPA	tobacco of a type brought to Chukotka from Alaska	"Akikwaghtaughaqeftiit tawaqalegnun. Talwa suughqalegllaget.  Pedersen nangllegtaghaqelghii. Suuma ataasiq, suumangwaaqut 12 pound-net qantaqat, tawaqat suumanguniiqiit. ‘They were coming out to trade baleen for tobacco. Since Pedersen was a kind man, he gave them one twelve pound case of packaged chewing tobacco. They called the tobaco “suuma”.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:124)"	сю̄ма
suume-	pos	IPA	to be rabid; to be drunk; to go berserk; to be in a trance (shaman); to act wild	suumuq ‘he or it is berserk’ / suumestaa ‘it made him act wild’	сю̄мы-
suumegkaq	pos	IPA	rabid animal	No information given.	сю̄мыхкақ
suumqaq	pos	IPA	something suddenly thought about; object of thought or memory	"suumqaqamken ‘I am now thinking about you’, ‘I have you on my mind’; nengiiskufsi suumqennaaghaghpesinga nengilgutngulunga ‘if you don’t have a place to stay, think about me and remember that you can stay with me’"	сю̄мқақ
suumqi-	pos	IPA	to remember; to be considerate; to keep in mind	ilangi yugem ilameggnun suumqineghtuqat ‘some people are considerate of others’	сю̄мқи-
suupae1	pos	IPA	soap	also used in Chukotka	сю̄паы1
suupae2	pos	IPA	soup; stew	also used in Chukotka (though maybe from Russian there); Naanga quyngimeng suupeliighaqeftuq neqekrangllaamaghmi suupeliightuusighqameng. ‘His mother was making reindeer stew while she was making fried bread so that they could have the stew to eat.’ (KALLAG. 74)	сю̄паы2
suupe-	pos	IPA	to blow	suupuq ‘he or it blew’; suupaa ‘he or it blew on it’ /	сю̄пы-
suupeliiq	pos	IPA	soup	No information given.	сю̄пылӣқ
suupeqe-	pos	IPA	to soap up; to lather up	suupequq ‘he lathered up’; suupeqaa ‘he lathered it up’ /	сю̄пықы-
suupgaghte-	pos	IPA	to change direction suddenly when fleeing; to change one’s mind	kaviiq malighqaghluku suupgaghtaakun tugaa ‘he chased after the fox and he caught it in spite of it’s changing direction’; yugem umyugagni upupeng suupgaghtestaak Nome-emun pifqaami pinaluni ‘the man finally changed his mind about going to Nome’	сю̄пхаҳты-
suupute-	pos	IPA	to exhale blood when caught (of sea mammal)	"aghveghteng paamkaqum tagtalangani suuputestaat ‘while shooting bombs at the whale, it started spurting blood as it exhaled’; ayveq malighqughluku suupusan naghullgaat ‘they went after a walrus, and when it spurted blood, they harpooned it’"	сю̄путы-
suuq	pos	IPA	murky liquid; strong tea	imighaa suughmeng ‘he put murky liquid (strong tea or the like) into it’; suughmeng qayughnaqunga ‘I am going to drink strong tea’	сю̄қ
suuygute-	pos	IPA	to splash on the water with something to try induce game to come to the surface	Chukotkan (R)	сю̄ӥгуты-
suvaaghwagh-	pos	IPA	to continue (excessively) in the same mood	"sakraaluni paninang suvaaghwaghaquq ‘he got angry, and is continuing on in the same mood’"	сювāӱӷаӷ-
suvate-	pos	IPA	to gossip; to spread news	aksaqluku ungipaq qaga kitum suvasimaa ‘someone secretly spread the news out there’; ungipaq qaga suvataqaat yakughnalghii ‘they are spreading the dangerous news out there’	сюваты-
suvinagh-	pos	IPA	"to be prickly, rough, or coarse to the touch"	suvinaghtuq ‘it is rough’ /	сювинаӷ-
suyaghnanigh-	pos	IPA	to run out of energy for moving on	No information given.	сюяӷнаниӷ-
suyaqnanigh-	pos	IPA	to lose the desire to do something on account of fatigue	"suyiighem tagtalangani qenwat suyaqnaniimalghii ‘barely moving, he finally got so tired he didn’t want to continue’; kaviiq malighqughluku tagtalmi meghughyalghiimi suyaqnanightuq ‘he chased after the fox and during that, when it got tired it gave up’"	сюяқньаниӷ-
suyeq	pos	IPA	hard slapping sound	No information given.	сюӥық
suyiigh-	pos	IPA	"to be barely moving on account of a rough surface, tiredness, etc."	akmagluni quulmun suyiighaqeftuq ‘he was barely going up carrying a pack’; suyiighumaluku naghughsimakanga ‘he passed him while he was barely going’	сюӥӣӷ-
suyvaghte-	pos	IPA	to get much or many; to get more than enough	suyvaghtuq ‘he got a lot’ / suyvaghutkaa ‘he got a lot of it’	сюӥваҳты-
taagaq	pos	IPA	pebble	Chukotkan (V&E); cf. taapak	тāгақ
taaghqe-	pos	IPA	to get injured on the head	"taghnughhaat milughmigullghiit ilayeng taaghqumaat uyghagmeng milughluku naasqwakun ‘when the children were throwing rocks at each other, one got injured on the head when his head was targeted with a rock’"	тāҳқы-
taaghta	pos	IPA	medical doctor	base is taaghta-: taaghtat ‘doctors’; also used in Chukotka; Maaten quyngit taaghtalghuut. Ellngan aghalighaqii aqnilghiit quyngit. … Quyngim taaghtanga kayusighaqaat quyngighqwaaghtet. ‘Nowadays the reindeer have a doctor. He gives medicine to the sick reindeer. … The herders help the reindeer doctor.’ (AANGHHAQ 77)  	тāҳта
taagkaghtaq	pos	IPA	ancient	No information given.	тахкаҳтақ
taagken	pos	IPA	from there; and then; then; so; consequently	"particle; Kaalluni, iitghumalghii. Iteghyalghiimi unangumalghii. Taagken yugem nuliini tuqluumakanga, ""Neghsaq taawa!"" ‘He arrived and came in. When he came evidentally he’d caught a seal. And then the man called to his wife, “I got a seal!”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 9)"	тāхкын
taagna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under aagna	тāгна
taagra	pos	IPA	celebration of some sort	Chukotkan	тāгра
taake-	pos	IPA	to be long (in space or time)	taakuq ‘it is long’ / taakluku ‘doing  it for a long time’; iknaqegkaq taakluku tamaana ilannaqenghitatgu(u)? are they going to count in that one who has been strong for a long time?	тāкы-
taakemna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under akemna	тāкымна
taakwna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under uukna	тāӱкньа
taalek	pos	IPA	first float on whaling gear	No information given.	тāлык
taameng	pos	IPA	no wonder!; so that's why!	"particle; aghulaqnaluni pimaaqa, taameng kagpagllak he was thinking of leaving, no wonder he was really packing; tufighnalukek igaqisigka pimaaqegkek taameng qiliiqnilikek he was thinking of buying my camera, no wonder he said he liked it’"	тāмың
taamna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under aamna	тāмна
taan’gani	pos	IPA	out in the ocean; down there	qageghtaa taan'ga meq ‘the sea out there has become rough with whitecaps’; Taan'gavek ivenrughtukut elngaatall malghugneghuluta. ‘We went in two [boats] out to sea using outboard motors.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:116)	тāнгани
taana	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under una	тāна
taane-	pos	IPA	to scrub	taanuq ‘he scrubbed himself or scrubbed something’; taanaa ‘he scrubbed it / taaniiq ‘he scrubbed something’	тāны-
taanegna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look underunegna	тāныгна
"taapak, taapagaq"	pos	IPA	piece of gravel; pebble	cf. taagaq	"тāпак, тāпагақ"
taape-	pos	IPA	to seep through	taapaa ‘it (liquid) is seeping through’ /	тāпы-
taapngig-	pos	IPA	to easily soak up liquid; absorbent	qaligni taapngighqwaamaniiqaak ‘he says his raincoat is not easily soaked’; qiipagham ilangi taapngigaqluteng ilameggneng ayuqut ‘some cloth is less easily soaked than others’	тāпңьиг-
taapute-	pos	IPA	to seep through	taaputuq ‘it (liquid) is seeping through’	тāпуты-
taaqe-	pos	IPA	to finish; to quit	"taaquq ‘he finished’; taaqaa ‘he finished it’ / Igaghyallghitunga. Sivuqami one-year igaghyaqaghlunga taaqegkaagunga. ‘I didn’t go to school (much). In Gambell I did finish one year of school.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:48); used in connection with a verb expanded by the postbase -neq1, to mean ‘when he, you, we, etc., finish V-ing’, that is, ‘after V-ing’; examples: Neneghmeng taaqsan nulighha allighimalghii nutaghaastaghhiinaghmeng. Allighineghmeng taaqsan ingaghqulluteng qavaasimalghiit. 'After (he finished) eating, his wife lay out only new mattresses. After (she finished) laying out the mattresses, they slept.' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 14); Taagken tawaten piluguneghmeng taaqluni yataaghqelluni aanuq, esnamun atghaghtuq. 'Then after (he finished) getting dressed he got ready and then went out, and he went down to the shore.' (AYUM. UNGIP. I:14); Neneghmeng taaqegkumta ingaghquullghaakut. 'After (we finish) eating, let's go to bed.' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 4); Gaaghniineghmeng taaqneghmini neghluni neneghmeng taaqneghmini ingliighluni qavaghaqelghii. ‘When he finished cooking he ate, and when he finished eating he prepared his bedding and slept.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 178)"	тāқы-
taaqegkaq	pos	IPA	finished product	No information given.	тāқыхкақ
taaqiinagh-	pos	IPA	to do in abundance; to do enough	used in the subordinative; nuliighhan qaltagnekun iqalluni sighlatkumakanga taaqiinaghluku ‘his wife got an abundance of fish in the bucket’	тāқӣнаӷ-
taaqriite-	pos	IPA	to be brightly or dark colored and stand out from background	especially against a white background	тāқшӣты-
taaqurragkiigh-	pos	IPA	to complete tasks right away	No information given.	тāқушахкӣӷ-
taatget	pos	IPA	"intersection of poles at top of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	this is a plural; the singular would be tatek	тāтхыт
taatghusiq	pos	IPA	brake	No information given.	тāтҳусиқ
taatkaghte-	pos	IPA	to hit on the nose	taatkaghtaa ‘he hit it on the nose’ /	тāткаҳты-
taatneq	pos	IPA	cartilage part of a whale’s nose	"aghvengneghmeggni taatneghmeng saghnaaqelghiit tangtaqughtughyaghqameng ‘when they get a whale, they collect the cartilage from the nose so they can be eaten as a crunchy food’"	тāтньық
taatqaghte-	pos	IPA	to kill by striking with an object	"qawaagtani yaqghighaqaq anaguluku taatqaghsimaa ‘he struck the bird that he had shot on its wing, killing it with a stick’; iingtaghyam leghlleghtani taatqaghtameng tuququumakangi ‘the molted geese hunter killed his geese by hitting them’"	тāтқаҳты-
taawa	pos	IPA	here it is!; there it is!; it's ready!	particle; also used to signal a shift in topic	тāӱа
taawanginaq	pos	IPA	but; and yet; only; however	"particle; Nanghiiqunalunga maalghugulutek. Taawanginaq uka tumemi mayughyaghqaq uusqalghii. ‘I’m thinking of taking both of you. But, along the way there is a very high obstacle’ (SULUWET 42)"	тāӱаңинақ
taawna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look underuugna	тāӱна
taawra	pos	IPA	the number seven (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	тāӱра
taayug-	pos	IPA	hurried; pressed for time	emotional root; taayugyugtuq ‘he feels pressed for time’; taayugnaghtuq ‘it causes one to feel pressured’	тāюг-
taayughqe-	pos	IPA	to hurry; to be in hurry	taayughquq ‘he is in a hurry’ / taayughqutkaa ‘he is hurrying with it’	тāюҳқы-
taflu	pos	IPA	handle of drum	No information given.	тафлью
tafsi	pos	IPA	"belt; belt around bottom of walrus skin roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	тафси
tafsi-	pos	IPA	to put on a belt	tafsiiq ‘he put on a belt’; tafsii ‘he put a belt on him’ /	тафси-
"tafsiin, tafsiita"	pos	IPA	strap; barrel hoop	No information given.	"тафсӣн, тафсӣта"
tafsikwagh-	pos	IPA	to use a makeshift belt	"sami taayughqemmi ama avangilngughmi tafsiikwaqiinaq pikayuk ‘when in a rush, or when there is nothing else, on can use a makeshift belt’"	тафситӱаӷ-
tafsimik	pos	IPA	"something kept on the belt such as a knife, tobacco pouch, or amulet"	No information given.	тафсимик
tafsineq	pos	IPA	small of back (of person)	No information given.	тафсинық
tafutaq	pos	IPA	walrus hide doubled in size by splitting	No information given.	тафутақ
tagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > taghsagh, taghtugh-; = tegh-"	таӷ-
taghneghaghqugh-	pos	IPA	to see one's reflection	taghneghaghqughtuq ‘he saw his reflection’	таӷныӷаҳқуӷ-
taghneghaghquuta	pos	IPA	mirror	"used in the dual, taghneghaghquutek, for one mirror; … katam tawatetuq esghalghiistun taghneghaghquutelugkun. … ‘just like seeing with a poor mirror (“For now we see through a glass, darkly”)’ (1 Corinthians 13.12)"	таӷныӷаҳқӯта
taghneghaq	pos	IPA	shadow; image; likeness; reflection	"also plural, taghneghat, for one image; cf. taghu"	таӷныӷақ
taghnughhaamalleq	pos	IPA	childhood	No information given.	таӷнуҳāмальық
taghnughhaghwaaq	pos	IPA	doll	No information given.	таӷнуҳаӷӱāқ
taghnughhalghutaq	pos	IPA	womb	Chukotkan (R)	таӷнуҳалӷутақ
taghnughhalgun	pos	IPA	fellow child within a group of children	No information given.	таӷнуҳалгун
taghnughhaq*	pos	IPA	child; baby	taghnughhaat naghaaghaqut eslami ‘the children are playing outside’; Aakaqa unaaq taghnughhangumaaq. ‘My older sister had a baby this morning.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 157); cf. taghu	таӷнуҳақ
taghnughhin	pos	IPA	tent of canvas fitted on sled to protect children (and mother) when traveling	No information given.	таӷнуҳин
taghnughhiqe-	pos	IPA	to babysit	taghnughhiquq ‘he is babysitting’	таӷнуҳиқы-
taghpagh-	pos	IPA	to open; to enlarge	applies to holes and other openings and also to flowers; taghpaghtuq or taghpaghaa ‘it opened’ / taghpaghtaa ‘he opened it more’	таҳпаӷ-
taghsagh-	pos	IPA	to awaken (him)	taghsaghaa ‘he woke him up’ /	таҳсяӷ-
taghtugh-	pos	IPA	to wake up	taghtughtuq ‘he woke up’ / taghtughtaa ‘he woke her up’	таҳтуӷ-
taghu	pos	IPA	person; man	said to be a shaman's word; cf. taghneghaq; see  Bogoraz’s comments on this word inBoza 1913:449 	таӷу
taghyughii-	pos	IPA	to swell after contact with salt water (of a cut)	"un’gum kelliin megha taghyughnilnguq, taghyughiisiqniiqegkangat inghusaq ‘the ocean water is salty, so it is a rule to keep salt water from getting into a cut’"	таӷьюӷӣ-
taghyughnite-	pos	IPA	to be salty	No information given.	таӷьюӷниты-
taghyuq	pos	IPA	salt; brine; sea or sea water; ocean	… tallimiitangani aghneghan elngaatall nenglun taanesnaken taghyumeng. ‘… every five days scrub your (semi-subterranean) house with sea water.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:15)	таӷьюқ
tagi-	pos	IPA	to come (to speaker)	tagiiq ‘he came’ / tagitaa ‘he brought it’; tagi ‘come here’; tagimalghii ‘he has come over here’; Maaten ilangani Ungazighmiit tagimalghiit Sivuqamun. ‘One time the Siberians came to St. Lawrence Island.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 41)	таги-
tagimun	pos	IPA	toward here; coming this way; coming home	adverbial particle; Tagimun qikmiik sukeralaataghtut. ‘Coming home their dogs ran faster.’ (UNKUS. 15)	тагимун
tagisqaghtaq	pos	IPA	gusty wind	"pennat manungitni angyat anuqem tagisqaghtam sakniqesimayaqangi ‘the gusty wind in front of the cliffs made the boat have a difficult time’; alpagyalghiimeng  tagisqaghtaq kayaalimalghii ‘when they made it through, the gusts got weak’"	тагисқаҳтақ
tagite-1	pos	IPA	to give (to speaker)(not in the sense of transferring ownership)	tagitaa ‘he gave it (to speaker)’ / tagitigu ‘give it (to me)’	тагиты-1
tagite-2	pos	IPA	to bring (to speaker)	tagitaa ‘he brought it (to speaker)’ /	тагиты-қ
tagitiqwaa-	pos	IPA	to be lost in the fog	"tengegkayuget tagitiqwaaluteng uteghsimaat Nome-emun ‘the airplane wasn’t sure where they were in the fog, so they went back to Nome’; tagitiqwaalghiit angyat guutaqluteng naalkumakangit ‘the boat was lost, but when they fired a few shots, they found them’"	тагитиқӱā-
tagitugiiq	pos	IPA	Kittlitz's murrelet (Brachyramphus brevirostris)	possibly ancient murrelet (Synthlioboramphus antiquus) instead	тагитугӣқ
tagituk	pos	IPA	fog	No information given.	тагитук
tagivagh-	pos	IPA	to give (to speaker)(not in the sense of transferring ownership); to hand (to speaker)	tagivaghhu ‘hand it over’; tagivaqaghhu ‘please give it to me’	тагиваӷ-
tagiyagh-	pos	IPA	for there to be a gust of wind	No information given.	тагияӷ-
taglaate-	pos	IPA	to bring (it) up the slope; to bring to the mountain for burial	ayumiq kiyang kevegluki taglaatkayugit tuqukat ‘long ago they would usually bring the dead to the mountain by carrying them’	тагля̄ты-
taglagh-	pos	IPA	to go up from sea to shore or up the shore; to go to Chukotka from St. Lawrence Is.; for wind to blow from the southwest; to move inland	taglaghtuq 'he went up' / taglaataa 'he brought it up'; taglaghtaa 'the wind brought it to the shore'; cf. tagyuqa-	тагляӷ-
taglaghta	pos	IPA	wind blowing to the shore	No information given.	тагляҳта
taglugute-	pos	IPA	to pull up; to drag up	Chukotkan (R); ivaghiniightet taglugusimaat aghveq esnamun ‘the hunters have pulled the whale to the shore’	таглюгиты-
tagnegh-	pos	IPA	to be black	No information given.	тагныӷ-
tagneghli	pos	IPA	soft black stone from Chukotka used to darken sinew so that stitches will blend with dark skin or fabric; graphite	No information given.	тагныӷли
tagneghllineq	pos	IPA	discolored or darkened ice (standing out amid white ice)	see item 78 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004; = tagneghneq	тагныҳльинық
tagneghneq	pos	IPA	discolored or darkened ice (standing out amid white ice)	No information given.	тагныӷнық
tagneghneq	pos	IPA	discolored or darkened ice (standing out amid white ice)	see item 78 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004; = tagneghllineq	тагныӷнық
tagneghruwaaq	pos	IPA	Lapland longspur (Calcarius lapponicus)	No information given.	тагныӷруӱāқ
tagneghsaasiq 	pos	IPA	darkening implement or substance such as used in tattooing	No information given.	тагныӷся̄сиқ
tagneghute-	pos	IPA	to become partially visible through the darkness 	tagneghutuq ‘it came into enough light to be seen’	тагныӷуты-
tagneghziigute-	pos	IPA	to be barely visible in the dim light	tagitugmi pika naayghaq tagneghziigutuq ‘the mountain is barely visible up there in the fog’; tagitugmi alisimaq tagneghziik yuuk ‘a silhouette of a man was visible in the fog’	тагныӷзӣгуты-
tagneghziik	pos	IPA	silhouette barely visible in dim light; dark barely visible thing	tagitugmi aliisimaaq tagneghziik yuuk ‘a silhouette of a man was barely visible in the fog’; ullghitagma iqeghtakek tagneghziiguuk ‘the color of my snowmachine is dark’	тагныӷзӣк
tagnemllaaq	pos	IPA	darkish thing or color; brown thing or color	No information given.	тагнымлья̄қ
tagnemyugaaq	pos	IPA	grey thing	No information given.	тагнымьюгāқ
tagneneghtaq	pos	IPA	"upper part of whale-boat, usually painted dark"	Chukotkan (R)	тагныныҳтақ
tagneneq	pos	IPA	pupil of eye	No information given.	тагнынық
tagneq	pos	IPA	black thing or blackness; dark thing or darkness; brown thing or color	No information given.	тагнық
tagneqegtaq	pos	IPA	completely black thing	No information given.	тагнықыхтақ
tagneqegte-	pos	IPA	to be completely black	No information given.	тагнықыхты-
tagneqraq	pos	IPA	dot; dark spot on skin; mole on skin	No information given.	тагнықшақ
tagrapak	pos	IPA	common eider (Somateria mollissima)	Chukotkan	таграпак
tagsigh-	pos	IPA	to beckon; to call to come	tagsighaa 'he beckoned or called for her to come' / tagsighiiq 'he beckoned or called for someone to come'	тахсиӷ-
tagsighaq	pos	IPA	rawhide rope cut lengthwise into thinner rope to be used in stretching animal hides to dry	ayumiq tagsighaq uglapestaaq atughniiqaat mangteghameng amighineghmeggni ‘they say they used a whole lot of rawhide rope that has been thinned for lashing drying skins onto a house’	тахсиӷақ
tagsighsaqe-	pos	IPA	to not come when called; to wait to be implored to come	No information given.	тахсиҳсяқы-
tagsiqligh-	pos	IPA	to invite (him) over for a definite purpose	igaghyat tagsiqlighteghiit saliqughnaluki ‘they invited the students in order to give them things’; akmaken tagsiqliimakangat aghviisqelluku ‘they invited him over from the mainland’	тахсиқльиӷ-
"tagtala, tagtalae"	pos	IPA	length in space or time; distance; course of time	tagtalanga or tagtalnga ‘its length or duration’; tagtalmi ‘after a time’; yimiksaghluku tagtalmi gginaghsiit ‘after being shy around him at length they got to know him’; igleghtem tagtalangani ‘in the course of his travels’; Kiyaghtaallghem tagtalangani aghnaq ighnimalghii mekelghiighhaghmeng. 'In the course of living (there) the woman gave birth to a little boy.' (UNGIPAGH. 134)	"тахталя, тахталяы"
tagtalmi	pos	IPA	later on	adverbial particle; Enkaam tagtalmi tawaten pangeghhnaqut Sulugenkut. ‘And later Suluk and family were going to visit Chukotka.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:108)	тахталми
tagugha-	pos	IPA	for surf to come in over a low part of the beach	tagughaaq 'the surf is covering the low part of the beach' /	тагуӷа-
tagyuqa-	pos	IPA	to slowly come toward the shore (of a boat)	tagyuqaaq 'it is coming to the shore' /	тагьюқа-
takagh-1	pos	IPA	to be crosswise; to be caught in an opening so that it cannot fit through	No information given.	такаӷ-1
takagh-2	pos	IPA	inhibited; shy; respectful	"emotional root; takaghyugtuq 'he feels inhibited'; takaqaa 'he feels inhibited, shy and/or respectful towards her'"	такаӷ-2
takaghaghquq	pos	IPA	fancy upper part of woman’s skin-boot	payaaqegni takaghaghquneghmeng taaqaak ‘the woman finished sewing the fancy upper part on her skin boot’	такаӷаҳқуқ
takaghqughvike-	pos	IPA	to cover by putting boards or the like crosswise over (it)	"aghnam ayemquulluni, laawaaq takaghqughvikaqaa ‘after the woman broke them (the sticks) to pieces, she put them in a dugout and covered them’"	такаҳқуӷвикы-
takaghte-	pos	IPA	to lean (it) against something	angyam napaqaa angyilghatgun takaghtigu ‘lean the boat’s pole against the boat rack’	такаҳты-
takaghyaq	pos	IPA	crosspiece supporting bed of sled  or keeping door securely closed; toggle; button; latch for door consisting of small piece of wood pivoting on a nail; barrier or obstacle that keeps one from acting as desired	amik takaghyighluku uninnaakesi ‘put a bar across the door and leave’; igleghsughngaaghemng sangwaa takaghyaqaat ‘they would be leaving but there’s something that’s keeping them from going’	такаӷьяқ
take-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > tagtala, taake-, takelli-, takelmun, takelriik, takesiq, takestaaq"	такы-
takellengugh-	pos	IPA	to lose patience	Chukotkan (R)	такыльыңуӷ-
takelli-	pos	IPA	to shorten; to make shorter	takellii 'he shortened it' /	такыльи-
takelliighagh-	pos	IPA	to shorten; to become shorter	takelliighaghtuq 'it got shorter' / Aghneghet takelliighaghii. ‘The days are getting shorter.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 14)	такыльӣӷаӷ-
takelmun	pos	IPA	lengthwise	particle	такылмун
takelriik	pos	IPA	elongated thing; oblong thing; thing	No information given.	такылрӣк
"takemriik, takemrewaaq"	pos	IPA	elongated thing; oblong thing; thing	#NAME?	"такымрӣк, такымрыӱāқ"
takeriik1	pos	IPA	elongated thing; oval thing; oblong thing	No information given.	такырӣк1
takeriik2	pos	IPA	cartridge	"Chukotkan (R); used in dual, takeriigek, for one cartridge"	такырӣк2
takerkak	pos	IPA	blue whale (Balaenoptera musculus)	No information given.	такышкак
takermiik	pos	IPA	oblong thing; oval thing; elongated thing	#NAME?	такырмӣк
takesiq	pos	IPA	dog or person notable for very short or tall stature	No information given.	такысиқ
takestaaghhaa-	pos	IPA	to be short	"takestaaghhaaguq 'it is short' / takestaaghhaaga or takestaaghhaawa? 'is it short?' (the form with w reveals that this base may still be, as it is historically, underlyingly takestaaghhau-)"	такыстāҳā-
takestaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	short thing	No information given.	такыстāҳақ
takestaaq	pos	IPA	short thing	No information given.	такыстāқ
taketuyiig-	pos	IPA	to be lengthy	"uyghagek taawa maalghuk, aallgha angqaperugnaaghaq aallgha taketuyiik ‘there are two rocks, the other one is round, and the other is lengthy’; qikmiq taana esgha taketuyuuk sangami ‘that dog there, see, is somewhat long; I wonder why’"	такытуӥӣг-
Takevaq	pos	IPA	Enmelen in Chukotka (well southwest of the Yupik area)	see Map 1 in Appendices	Такывақ
taki	pos	IPA	act of making the rounds to check on traps or nets	Chuktokan (R); taki utkusenun kiyaghtaquq unaangulukunginaghqun ‘he only checks his traps in the mornings’; piyaaniightem taaqumaa taki utkusemineng ighivgaamaan ‘the hunter finished checking the traps as evening was progressing’	таки
takii-	pos	IPA	to approach game (while hunting)	"angyat nunavagneng teskana takiigaqut ‘a boat out there is approaching a herd of walruses on the ice down there’; takiilghiit wiin yakughhutelteki ‘let's go slower for now for (the sake of) the ones who are approaching game’; uugtemeng takiimaluta ayveghem aaniinkut ‘when we were approaching a seal on ice, a walrus popped up’"	такӣ-
taklagh-	pos	IPA	spread out; stretched out	postural root; taklaghtuq 'he stretched out'; taklaghtaa 'he stretched it out'	такльяӷ-
taklaghrukegte-	pos	IPA	to be straight	No information given.	такльяӷрукыхты-
taklaghruketun	pos	IPA	straight	adverbial particle	такльяӷрукытун
taku-	pos	IPA	to go to a specific place for a definite reason	takwaa 'he went to it' / takwiiguq 'he went for something'; Takuluku meteghllugllagem sayugaa. 'After going over to him (the wolf) the big raven pulled him out (of the water).' (AYUM. UNGIP. I:8)	таку-
takumrraaqe-	pos	IPA	"to leave (it, an important or valuable thing) out"	manit takumrraaqigatiit ‘they don’t just put money anywhere’; takumrraaqegpenaki megnunalghiit tamaakut ‘don’t just put important things anywere’	такумшāқы-
takumsug-	pos	IPA	to go somewhere for pleasure or entertainment	No information given.	такумсюг-
takumsunaq	pos	IPA	thing that has been made attractive to behold	aghnaghaat takumsugnaghsaatesqumakangit ‘they told the girls to fix up themselves up so that they will look attractive’	такумсюнақ
takuughagh-	pos	IPA	to go from place to place	qaagna nunalgun takuughaghaqluku ungipaaqiisqaat ‘they told him to go house-to-house out there to spread the word’	такӯӷаӷ
takuyangllagh-	pos	IPA	to tap on another's shoulders to get attention	"ilani nagaqunghisan takuyangllaghluku qiivyan ungipaataa ‘when his partner didn’t hear, he tapped on his shoulder and when he turned, he told him’"	такуӥаңльаӷ-
takwiista	pos	IPA	inspector; investigator	No information given.	такӱӣста
tala	pos	IPA	dollar	"Entaqun umyugaan seghleqaa, palaghaghnnaqniluku. Elngaatall aneghneghnnaqsaghaa tukfighluku. Qafsina-thousand talaghllak piyaghaa. ‘He must have thought that it [the fur] [was being appraised] to low. The sale seemed like a good deal [to me]. He was being offered so many thousands of dollars for it.’ (PANGEGH. 12)"	таля
talaghitagh-	pos	IPA	to jump up from the surface of the water (of a fish)	No information given.	таляӷитаӷ-
taliighpaguute-	pos	IPA	to come momentarily into view	No information given.	талӣҳпагӯты-
talitaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to keep out of sight	No information given.	талитаӷӱāӷ-
talite-	pos	IPA	to go out of sight behind something	talituq ‘he went behind something’; talitaa (or talitestaa) ‘he took it out of sight’ / cf. talu-	талиты-
tallaagh-	pos	IPA	to split sinew for thread	No information given.	талья̄ӷ-
tallaaq	pos	IPA	split sinew	No information given.	талья̄қ
talligh-	pos	IPA	"to dance Inupiaq style, seated,with arm motions only"	Ukivagmiit tallighnaqut ‘the King Islanders are going to dance while seated’; tallit esghapagnaghllaguut ‘dances while seated are very entertaining’	тальиӷ-
Tallimaa aghneq	pos	IPA	Thursday	so called because Thursday is the fifth day of the week	Тальимā аӷнық
tallimagneq	pos	IPA	five things; five groups	"used with a plural ending and therefore realized as tallimagneghet, tallimagneghneng, etc.; used to indicate five things, when the noun for that thing is used in the plural or dual even for a single entitity, or to indicate five groups (such as families), thus:  … mangteghat tallimagneghet aliighumalghiit. ‘… five houses had come into view.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 20); note that the plural, mangteghat, without the word in question could  be used for a single house"	альимагнық
tallimat	pos	IPA	five	"cf. talliq; the word tallimat is a plural, but the singular, tallima, can also occur as in:  Ayumiqulleq tallima atughaghput tagitemnneng. ‘We have been here five years since we moved back.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 43)"	тальимат
tallimiin	pos	IPA	the fifth one; the fifth time	No information given.	тальимӣн
talliq	pos	IPA	arm	No information given.	тальиқ
talliqeregaq	pos	IPA	foreleg socket or joint of animal; hole on sea mammal skin where the front flipper was	No information given.	тальиқырыгақ
talliquq	pos	IPA	back fin; front flipper of sea mammal	No information given.	тальиқуқ
tallu-	pos	IPA	to split sinew for thread	talluuq ‘he is splitting sinew’; tallaa ‘he is splitting it’ /	талью-
tallugh-	pos	IPA	shy; intimidated; cowed; timid	"emotional root; tallughyugtuq ‘he feels timid, intimidated or cowed’; talluqaa ‘he feels timid toward him, intimidated by him’; tallughnatun ‘harshly, severely’"	тальюӷ-
talugh-	pos	IPA	to move out of sight	talughtuq ‘he moved out of sight’ / talughtaa ‘he moved it out of sight’; Neghllak qemim qaaynganilnguq talughngayaghqaanghituq. ‘A building on a hill shall not be hid.’ (Matthew 5:14)	талюҳ-
talughaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to move repeatedly in and out of sight	No information given.	талюӷаҳтаӷ-
taluq	pos	IPA	area out of sight	"nunavaget talaakun takuluki llaaghanwha pikengvikumakangit ‘they approached a herd of waluses where they couldn’t be seen, and so they caught some of them’; talaakun sakayuget liigikestengngunateng natelnguut yuget ‘some different people can do things without it being known’"	талюқ
taluutaq	pos	IPA	screen to keep one out of view	"sikiggaq uyghagllagmeng qantaghansan, mekelghiighhaam uyghak taluutaqluku sikiggaq teghigtuumakanga ‘when the squirrel was near the big rock, the boy used that rock as a screen to keep from being seen and waited for it so he could hit it’"	талӯтақ
talwa	pos	IPA	even; not even; yet; in addition	"particle; paaghqituq, talwa naagu qikmighhaq no creature is there not even a puppy; taayughqelluni talwa unisimii ilangi aatkani he was leaving in such a hurry that he even left behind some of his clothing; aghulaqumalghiillu talwa esghanghitaqa he had already left and I didn't even get to see him’; Talwa kitum alngunak kenelghutak kumaghllukek sagneghmun asingiinnaanghitaak. ‘No one at all lights a lamp and puts it underneath a vessel.’ (Matthew 5.15); Atagpesi liisimakaa aklukegkaghsi, talwa aaptestegpenasi. ‘Your Father knws your needs, even though you don’t ask him.’ (Matthew 6.8)"	талӱа
tamaa-	pos	IPA	to chew	tamaaguq ‘he chewed; tamaagaa he chewed it’ /	тамā-
tamaghhagh-	pos	IPA	all; both (when used in dual); every	"used in the quantifier/qualifier construction; tamaghhaghmeng aghulaqut ‘they all left’; tamaghhaamta aanqaghtaatukut ‘we all suddenly went out’; tamaghhaghmek neghaquk ‘they are both eating’; Meghem kayunga tamaghhaan ungipaatquumakanga, “Amaa esnamun aghneq tamaghhaan piyaagaquq.” ‘He told every  bullhead of the sea, “A wolf walks on the shore every day.”’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 84)"	тамаҳаӷ-
"tamana, tamaana"	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under maana	"тамана, тамāна"
tameghaq	pos	IPA	piece of meat that is eaten with something oily	sameng tameghighluku neghnakefut ‘we’ll add some meat with it and eat it’; tameghaghqameng negniimaanga ‘I took a share of meat for to be eaten with something oily’	тамыӷақ
tamekestaq	pos	IPA	"something that is not supposed to be swallowed, but just chewed"	"kaamet enkaam whaa tamekestaagut ‘so gum is one that isn’t to be swallowed, but just chewed’; ayumiq tamekestangllaghluteng pikayuget ‘long ago, they would make something that would only be chewed’"	тамыкыстақ
tamlag-	pos	IPA	to land (of a boat); to beach a boat	tamlagtuq ‘it (the boat) or he (the person in the boat) landed’; tamlagaa ‘it landed at it’ / tamlagutaa ‘he landed it’	тамляг-
tamlagvik	pos	IPA	dock; wharf	No information given.	тамлягвик
tamlineq	pos	IPA	"lower part of curtain of the aagra, theinsulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	"Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, tamlinghet, for one curtain"	тамлинық
tamlu	pos	IPA	chin	No information given.	тамлю
tamlughun	pos	IPA	chin tatoo	also tamlughuta	тамлюӷун
Tamniq	pos	IPA	Tomname Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Тамниқ
tampa	pos	IPA	damper	No information given.	тампа
tamuneq	pos	IPA	type of large clam; razor clam (?)	species identification undetermined; Ayvemta siighnaa tamuneghmeng imaqeftuq. ‘The stomach of the walrus we caught was full of razor clams.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 157)	тамунық
tane-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > taane-, tanughqe-"	таны-
tanem	pos	IPA	finally; once again	"particle; with the implication of a good outcome despite conditions; usually used with the postbase -laatagh-, ‘to V again, to V anyway’,on the verb; tanem aliighlaataghaa ‘once again it has cleared up’; tanem aviiteghllagluni kaatataghaghlaataghtuq ‘finally, after being away for so long, he returned’"	таным
tanemlleqa	pos	IPA	and then again	particle	танымльықа
tanemwha	pos	IPA	then also	particle	танымӱьа
tangeghqaq	pos	IPA	bread	No information given.	таңыҳқақ
tangeghsaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to go to a relative’s grave after five days of mourning	Chukotkan (R)	таңыҳсаҳтуӷ-
tangeghtu-	pos	IPA	to be solid; to be hard; to be tough	Aghnasalgem ayveghem mangunangi tangeghtughllagtut. ‘The skin of the cow walrus is very tough.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 158)	таңыҳту-
tangeghtughte-	pos	IPA	to harden	No information given.	таңыҳтуҳты-
tangeghtupaaruq	pos	IPA	hickory wood as used in sleds	No information given.	таңыҳтупāруқ
tangela	pos	IPA	funnel	No information given.	таңыля
tangeq1	pos	IPA	solid part of something; reason behind something	No information given.	таңық1
tangeq2	pos	IPA	ancestor	this may be the same word as tangeq1 rather than a homonym	таңық2
tangeqeghrengetaq	pos	IPA	long oar or mast tied at the bow of a boat to help keep the boat from tilting to one side when it is being walked over rough ice	"uwanlluten tangeqeghrengetami pi iknaqsugneghhaaluten ‘be at the front part of the boat at the oar while it is being walked over the ice, since you are strong’"	таңықыӷрыңытақ
tangeqrak	pos	IPA	pilot bread; cracker	a Savoonga word	таңықшак
tangigh-	pos	IPA	to eat (greens) along with one’s other food	yuuk tangightuq nunivagmeng ‘the man is eating greens with his food’; yugem tangighaa nunivak uqughqun ‘the man is eating the greens with blubber’	таңиӷ-
tangki	pos	IPA	power winch	"Enkaam angyaghpagmeng taagken angwaaghumaamta uteghmun, taakut tangkimiita iighsuutet uyghiin, ghhataghnaqem angtalnganeng, …. ‘Then the ship tried to go backwards using a winch and the having the anchors as deadmen in an effort to free the ship, …’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:140)"	таңки
tangtagh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > tangtaquq, tangteghaq, tangtaqergaq"	таңтаӷ-
tangtaqergaq	pos	IPA	cooked blubber	No information given.	таңтақыргақ
tangtaqughruk	pos	IPA	bronchial tube	No information given.	таңтақуӷрук
tangtaquq	pos	IPA	cartilage	aghneq neghuutukut aghveghem tangtaqghwaneng ‘today we ate whale cartilage’	таңтақуқ
tangteghaq	pos	IPA	cartilage in nose; nasal passages	"used in the dual, tangteghak, for nasal passages"	таңтыӷақ
tangyeghiitaq	pos	IPA	wrist warmer	No information given.	таңӥыӷӣтақ
tangyeghmik	pos	IPA	wristwatch	"used in the dual, tangyeghmigek, for one watch"	таңӥыӷмик
tangyeghun	pos	IPA	bracelet; ring around something	"also tangyeghuta; also used in the plural, tangyeghutet, for one bracelet; esghaghyaqenni aawmeng tangyeghusighlliluni pananga‘when he saw it, the spear had a ring of blood on it’"	таңӥыӷун
tangyeq 	pos	IPA	wrist	tangyeghegka or tangyeghenka ‘my wrists’	таңӥық
tanigh-	pos	IPA	to cut piece off of (it)	tanighaa ‘he cut off a piece of it’ / tanighiiq ‘he cut off a piece’	таниӷ-
tanighaate-	pos	IPA	to be an exception	"ataasiq yuuk akulangitneng tanighaalluni qinuyugullghiit pillghisimalghii ‘one person was an exception when they all got sick’; iqallugameng nuluuteghllagni tanighaalluni kayunneghmeng aghtughtuq ‘when we were all jigging for tomcod, he was the only one who didn’t get any’"	таниӷāты-
tanightugh-	pos	IPA	to cut off pieces	tanightughtuq ‘he cut off pieces’; tanightughaa ‘he cut pieces off of it’ /	таниҳтуӷ-
taniilqe-	pos	IPA	to treat unequally; to leave out	"piniqillelek yuuk taniillghituq avangituq ‘a man who is considerate never leaves anyone out’; nengiillghiit ilateng taniilqelluki pimalghiit ‘when they were dividing the food, they didn’t include others’"	танӣльқы-
tanngae	pos	IPA	stranger; foreigner; raider; bandit	"tannget ‘a band of strangers’; Tawani kiyaghsimaluki, pillugaghyaghtut tagimalghiit, tannget. ‘As they were living like that warriors came, raiders.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 45)"	танңаы
tanngengilga	pos	IPA	string	No information given.	танңыңилга
tannguurngae	pos	IPA	large sled used by Chukotkan reindeer herders	No information given.	танңӯрңаы
tanpeghraq	pos	IPA	tarpaulin for a tent; old hide or thick material	No information given.	танпыӷрақ
tanpeq	pos	IPA	"dried walrus hide as used on the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.), or on a skin boat"	No information given.	танпық
tanpigh-	pos	IPA	"to put on, or get put on, dried walrus hide"	tanpightuq ‘it or he (i.e. his house or boat) got a walrus hide covering’; tanpighaa ‘he put walrus hide on it’ /	танпиӷ-
tanqighhiinaghqun	pos	IPA	monthly	particle; Chukotkan (R); ellnga tanqighhiinaghqun aglaghaquq nunaghllagmun ‘he goes to town monthly’	танқиҳӣнаҳқун
tanqighlluk	pos	IPA	bright moonlight	No information given.	танқиҳльюк
tanqighsuun	pos	IPA	calendar	also tanqighsuuta	танқиҳсю̄н
tanqiq	pos	IPA	moon; month	"tanqiq piituq ‘there’s a new moon’; tanqiq naqenqaghquq ‘the moon is full’; tanqiq avegsimaaq ‘there’s a half moon, it’s the middle of the month’; tanqighllugllak ‘bright moonlight’"	танқиқ
tanughqe-	pos	IPA	to scrub thoroughly	mingla tanughqaa ‘he scrubbed the wall thoroughly’	тануҳқы-
tape-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > taape-, taperghugh-, tapughtugh-"	тапы-
tapeghaataq	pos	IPA	painter (rope attached to the bow of the boat)	"angyat qagallaagmi tamlagnaqelghiit, quutmeng sivuyagta araghaat, “tapeghaataq milutigu!” ‘they yelled from the shore to the man at the bow of the boat that was about to land through the waves, “throw the painter!”’"	тапыӷāтақ
Tapeghaq	pos	IPA	north beach of Troutman Lake (Naayvaq)	No information given.	Тапыӷақ
taperghugh-	pos	IPA	to seep slowly and continuously	No information given.	тапырӷуӷ-
tapghaaghaq	pos	IPA	razor or rock-boring clam; long thin rope	No information given.	тапҳāӷақ
tapghaghaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to lasso reindeer	Chukotkan	тапҳаӷаҳтаӷ-
Tapghaghaq	pos	IPA	Silook Camp on north shore of Koozata Lagoon	No information given.	Тапҳаӷақ
tapghaghrak	pos	IPA	rope on harpoon and float	No information given.	тапҳаӷрак
tapgham ketanga	pos	IPA	southwest	No information given.	тапҳам кытаңа
Tapghapagaq	pos	IPA	Ataakas Camp on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Тапҳапагак
tapghaq	pos	IPA	rope; isthmus; long sandy beach; spider web	No information given.	тапҳақ
tapghi-	pos	IPA	to make rope	No information given.	тапҳи-
Tapghuq	pos	IPA	Apetiki Camp on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Тапҳуқ
tapi-	pos	IPA	to sew a patch onto the sole of a boot to keep water out	Chukotkan (R)	тапи-
Tapisagek	pos	IPA	Tapisaghak River on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Таписагык
taplaa-	pos	IPA	to start being away from parents (animals or humans); to wander; to walk around on one’s own (of a baby or child)	No information given.	таплья̄-
tapnaghte-	pos	IPA	to reinforce a worn out part of a rope with another rope	sakeqsiqaq tapghaq tapnaghlluku atughaat ‘they put a rope alongside the worn out one in case it breaks’	тапньаҳты-
tapughtugh-	pos	IPA	to continue to seep through	No information given.	тапуҳтуӷ-
tapusigh-	pos	IPA	to add another rope as a reinforcement	ayveq naghullegluku alla tapusighaat ‘they harpooned the walrus and added second line to it’	тапусиӷ-
taqayuqe-	pos	IPA	to reach the limits of one's physical abilities due to overwork	"neghighluku yuget nukalpigat ulapesteghhllagaqegkangit repall ilangani taqayuqaqluteng ‘in the old days, they would have the boys exercise so much that some of them reach the limits of their physical abilities’; qikmii taqayuqluni nengnnaniimalghii ‘the dog couldn’t pull anymore from reaching the limits of its physical abilities’"	тақаюқы-
taqe-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > taaqe-, taqellengugh-, taqugh-"	тақы-
taqefkagh-	pos	IPA	to finish quickly	ulimaragkiiqani taqefkaghluku unugtestegpenaan akikumakanga ‘he sold his quickly made carving after finishing it before night’; kaamgek angatughqegkagni taqefkaamaak ‘she finished the boots she was working on right away’	тақыфкаӷ-
taqelghagh-	pos	IPA	to complete the work on (it)	kaamgek kakikagni aghnam taqelghaghaqeftaak ‘the woman was completing the boots that she had been sewing’; homework-eni Monday-vagilgan taqelghaamii ‘she completed her homework before Monday’	тақылӷаӷ-
taqellengugh-1	pos	IPA	to be patient and persevering	Chukotkan	тақыльыңуӷ-1
taqellengugh-2	pos	IPA	to tire of being asked and finally agree or give in; to reach point where one can no longer refuse; to tire of gossip and to start to defend oneself	No information given.	тақыльыңуӷ-2
taqeq	pos	IPA	vein; artery; capillary	taaqghi ‘his veins’	тақық
taqiiq	pos	IPA	small cod-like fish	exact identification undetermined; caught in slush in early winter	тақӣқ
taqik	pos	IPA	boundary between meat and blubber of whale or any skin	"aghveq taqigakun pilagaqeftat ‘it happens so that they are cutting the whale at the part between the meat and blubber’; tetaghluki taqiganun, taqigikun makregtaqluki ‘they would cut it down to the meat part then they would cut it off from that part’"	тақик
taqmanpak	pos	IPA	adult; mature person; capable person; strong but small adult	No information given.	тақмьанпак
taqmiigh-	pos	IPA	to finish; to complete	angyam piineqellgha taqmiighnaqaat ‘they are about to finish painting the boat’; qamiyek ulimaaghegni taqmiighaqeftaak ‘it shows that he is finishing the sled that he is making’	тақмьӣӷ-
taqugh-	pos	IPA	to finish one by one	taqughtuq 'he finished one item after another'; taqughaa 'he finished them one after another'	тақуӷ-
taqughte-	pos	IPA	to braid one's hair	taqughtuq 'she braided her (own) hair'; taqughtaa 'she braided her (another's) hair' /	тақуҳты-
taqughun	pos	IPA	woman's cheek tatoo	also taqughuta	тақуӷун
taqughutaq	pos	IPA	fastener for braids	No information given.	тақуӷутақ
taqupiitaq	pos	IPA	headband; temple	#NAME?	тақупӣтақ
taqupitaq	pos	IPA	headband; temple	#NAME?	тақупитақ
taquq	pos	IPA	side of face	No information given.	тақуқ
taqusneghaq*	pos	IPA	red-dyed skin of baby seal	No information given.	тақусныӷақ
taqustaqaa-	pos	IPA	to suffocate; to choke	No information given.	тақустақā-
tareqaq	pos	IPA	small piece of walrus hide without blubber or meat	No information given.	тарықақ
tareqi-	pos	IPA	to remove blubber from walrus hide	No information given.	тарықи-
tarughite-	pos	IPA	to go behind something and out of sight; to disappear from view behind something	angyat aapghaat sangwaa qivallugneng tarughinniluku ‘the boat's people told about something that disappeared from view behind the sea ice’	таруӷиты-
"tasighaq, tasigaq"	pos	IPA	front or rear piece between the gunwales of boat	No information given.	"тасиӷақ, тасигақ"
tasighun	pos	IPA	"rope threaded through holes around the bottom edge of the skin cover of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.), andweighted with rocks"	also tasighuta	тасиӷун
tasigu-	pos	IPA	to club (with a stick)	"ayumiq neghsat uugtet tasiguluki tuququghniiqiit suflugiilluku salin ‘long ago, they say, they would club seals to kill them when they had no guns’; unaghsimeng awiim tasigutaqaqelghiit ‘they probably used sticks to club things’; tasigutaq 'cane with a handle'"	тасигу-
Tasiguvik	pos	IPA	Tasighoovik Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Тасигувик
tasiiq	pos	IPA	harness-like device for dog 	perhaps a makeshift device like a collar; yugem maghyaghqughteni tasiighmeng qaghlungllamaa aqnighhnayukan ‘that man made a harness-like device for his lead dog so that it wouldn't get hurt’	тасӣқ
"tasik, tasiq"	pos	IPA	short piece of rope used for tying or carrying something	No information given.	"тасик, тасиқ"
tasikligh-	pos	IPA	to tie rope onto someone or something	No information given.	тасикльиӷ-
Tasiq	pos	IPA	"New Chaplino in Chukotka, also former village near Cape Cherkasskogo (near the mouth of Tkachen Bay); Tkachen Bay"	"see Map 3 in Appendices; after the establishment of New Chaplino further up the bay and its receiving the name Tasiq, the former site of Tasiq has been called Tasipik"	Тасиқ
tasiwaaghaq	pos	IPA	crosspiece on boat rack	used in pairs	тасиӱāӷақ
taslugh-	pos	IPA	to hold hands with	taslughaa 'he is holding her hand' / tasluutuk or tasluqutuk 'they2 are holding hands'	тасльюӷ-
tasluusiq	pos	IPA	leash	Chukotkan (R)	таслю̄сиқ
tasugte-	pos	IPA	to cut a seal from the flipper opening to the front slit when skinning prepratory to stretching and drying the skin	teghiglugem amiiraa tasuglluku niightughaat ‘they cut the skin of the young bearded seal from the flipper opening to the front slit and stretched it to dry’	тасухты-
tatame-	pos	IPA	to be scared; to get terrified	No information given.	татамы-
tateghte-	pos	IPA	to brake; to come up against; to be stuck on something	tateghtuq 'he put on the brakes' or 'came to a halt being stuck or coming up against something' (?) / tateghtutaa 'he stopped it by braking or stopped for it'	татыҳты-
Tategnaq	pos	IPA	Tategnak Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 7 in Appendices	Татыгнақ
tategruk	pos	IPA	ridge; peak	yuuk mangtegham tategruganun mayughluni qineghpeghwaaghtuq ‘the man climbed to the ridge of the roof and looked around using binoculars’; qilughwaaghet tategruggiitnun mekelghiighet mayughtuusimalghiit ‘the boys climbed to the ridge of the high rocks’	татыгрук
tategun	pos	IPA	jib (small sail put in front of the mast of the boat to help travel in low winds)	"also tategun;used in the plural, tategutet, for one such sail; aygumun sukanginnaqukut tategutet nekegteki ‘we are going to be slow going against the wind, so put up the jib’; tategutelget naqamalla sukaghllaguut ‘so lucky, the ones with jibs are faster’"	татыгун
tatek	pos	IPA	bridge of nose; ridge of hills	taatgan nenga ‘crosspiece on eyeglasses over bridge of nose’	татык
Tatek	pos	IPA	Tatik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Татык
tatesaghte-	pos	IPA	to hit on the nose	No information given.	татысяҳты-
tatmeghruk	pos	IPA	area between shoulder blades; spine from neck to waist	Chukotkan (R); = ggatmeghruk	татмьыӷрук
tatmileg-	pos	IPA	ricochet	neghsaq guulluku tatmilkaghvikluku unakaa ‘he shot a seal and the bullet ricocheted and hit the seal (again)’; aangqaq milulluku tekilluni tatmilegyalghiimi ingaverugllak ‘he threw the ball and it hit the ground and it bounced off far away’	татмьилыг-
tatngulluk	pos	IPA	something that impedes visibility	"for example, dense smoke or a group of people or houses blocking the view"	татңьульюк
tavaghte-	pos	IPA	to group together by tying (them) together; to tie together in a group	qawaagtani tavaghlluki qaakii qamiyminun ‘he tied the birds he caught together and placed them on his sled’; tallimawaaqluki tavaghtaqiit qawaaget ‘they tie birds together at up to five at a time’	таваҳты-
tavet	pos	IPA	starboard (right side of boat)	adverbial particle; see also put	тавыт
tawa-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"demonstrative adverb base; see also taana (under una); see also tawani, tawaten"	таӱа-
tawala	pos	IPA	dried fish	Chukotkan	таӱаля
tawani	pos	IPA	there	No information given.	таӱани
tawaqa	pos	IPA	tobacco	No information given.	таӱақа
tawaqapik	pos	IPA	leaf tobacco	No information given.	таӱақапик
tawarungi-	pos	IPA	to depend on for security and support	qikmiq tawarungiiq elpenun 'the dog depends on you'	таӱаруңи-
tawaten	pos	IPA	like that; that way	particle	таӱатын
tawatengwaaq	pos	IPA	very much that way	particle	таӱатыңӱāқ
tawatenta	pos	IPA	fine like that	particle; an expression of approval	таӱатынта
tawatestaghhiinaq	pos	IPA	like that all the time	particle	таӱатыстаҳӣнақ
tawatete-	pos	IPA	to be that way; to be like that	"tawateteghngaan 'even though it is like that', ‘let it be that way’"	таӱатыты-
tawaviigh-	pos	IPA	to get very close to	tawaviighnaqluku uugta ateghtuq guutestengngunani ‘the seal got off the ice without them shooting it because they got way too close (before they fired)’; nunavaget kergamqun tawaviighluki ayveghaghvikumiit ‘they got very close to a herd of walrus on the ice and caught some’	таӱавӣӷ-
tawli	pos	IPA	towel	"Chukotkan; St. Lawrence Islanders use veglluk, literally ‘something like old grass’ for ‘towel’ instead of this word"	таӱли
tayeghqagh-	pos	IPA	to roll up one's sleeves	tayeghqaghluni meghmun kaguuq ‘he rolled up his sleeves and reached into the water’; inglugtun tayeghqaghluni peghhightuq ‘he rolled up both sides of his sleeves and washed his hands’	таӥыҳқаӷ-
tayngeruut	pos	IPA	nomads’ tents	this is a plural	таӥңырӯт
tazigna	pos	IPA	No information given.	see iigna	тазигна
tazikna	pos	IPA	No information given.	see iikna	тазикньа
tazimante-	pos	IPA	to be gone; to not come back; to not show up again	"ayveq malighquqaat atghaghluninguq tazimantuq ‘the walrus they were going after dived and didn’t come up again’; angyat ayumiq ataasit tazimantekaagut ‘long ago, one boat disappeared’"	тазитанты-
tazimkaghtaq	pos	IPA	from long ago; old one	tazimkaghtameng nalkuutut iggereghwaalghiit ‘the diggers found a really old object’; tazimkaghtat ungipaghaatet atughnaqiit ‘they are going to tell a really old story’	тазимкаҳтақ
tazimna	pos	IPA	No information given.	see iimna	тазимна
tefaay	pos	IPA	No information given.	"particle; an expression made at the end of a story, said to represent the sound of spitting, though this act need not accompany the expression; Qamagtuq, tefaay! 'It's done, tefaay!'"	тыфāӥ
tefli	pos	IPA	"food particles, stains, etc., around one's mouth; crud around the mouth"	No information given.	тыфльи
teflilgu-	pos	IPA	to have crud around one's mouth	teflilguuq 'he has crud around his mouth' /	тыфльилгу-
tefliliighqe-	pos	IPA	to get crud around one's mouth	No information given.	тыфльилӣҳқы-
teflingigh-	pos	IPA	to wipe one's mouth	teflingightuq 'he wiped his (own) mouth'; teflingighaa 'he wiped his (another's) mouth' /	тыфльиңиӷ-
teflingiisiq	pos	IPA	"towel, napkin, etc., used to wipe one's mouth"	No information given.	тыфльиңӣсиқ
Tefliq	pos	IPA	former village northeast of Old Chaplino in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Тыфльиқ
teflitu-	pos	IPA	to have a lot of crud around one's mouth	teflituuq 'his mouth area is very dirty' /	тыфльиту-
tefsaghug-	pos	IPA	for wind to be blowing over and down a hill or mountain	nallanga tefsaghulguftuq ‘the area in front of it has wind blowing down’	тыфсаӷуг-
tefte-	pos	IPA	to lean over; to drape over	teftuq 'he leaned over something'; teftaa 'he draped it over something' / teftengngaaq (or tevngaaq) 'it is draped over something'	тыфты-
tefutaq	pos	IPA	"ceiling, made of reindeer skin, of the aagra, the insulated inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	Chukotkan (R)	тыфутақ
tegak	pos	IPA	rutting bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)	said to smell like gasoline	тыгак
tegetuwaaq	pos	IPA	arctic cinquefoil roots (Potentilla hyparctica)	No information given.	тыгытуӱāқ
teggaaghqe-	pos	IPA	to stiffen from being frozen	"uksumi aghvigat eslakun agaghlleghhiini aga teggaaghqaqii ‘when hanging washed clothes in the winter, they become frozen and stiff’"	тыхāҳқы-
tegge-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > teggaaghqe-, teggellghiigh-, teggeq, teggmag-, teggughte-, teggun, teggussiisiq, teggusiita; cf. tekagh-, tekruqaq"	тыхы-
teggellghiigh-	pos	IPA	"to be afraid, hiding one's fear from others; to feel scared inside"	"naayvami mekelghiighhaat esghaghluki kanaghnayukata teggellghiighutkumkaniiqii ‘when he saw the boys in the frozen lake, he got scared inside that they might step through (thin ice)’; Sivungameng tagiiqngami teggellghiiqaaniiquq iflangwaaghanayukami ‘when he was coming from Savoonga, he says he got scared inside lest he get lost'"	тыхыльҳӣӷ-
teggeq	pos	IPA	hard wood	No information given.	тыхық
teggi-	pos	IPA	to stiffen; to harden	aningwaaghaa teggiluni imangumalghii ‘his boil got hard then it got puss’; paninang teggiluni ayuquq kilillgha ‘his cut still is as when it got hard’	тыхи-
teggmag-	pos	IPA	to be stiff	No information given.	тыхмьаг-
teggmagsaasiq	pos	IPA	iron for clothes	Chukotkan (V&E)	тыхмьахся̄сиқ
teggmak	pos	IPA	stiff thing	No information given.	тыхмьак
teggughte-	pos	IPA	to compress into a hard ball	No information given.	тыхуҳты-
teggun	pos	IPA	splint	also tegguta	тыхун
teggusiisiq	pos	IPA	stretcher	"used in the dual, teggusiisik, for one stretcher"	тыхусӣсиқ
teggusiita	pos	IPA	stiffener	also teggusiin	тыхусӣта
tegh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > teghsagh-, teghtugh-; = tagh-; cf. teghlugte-"	тыӷ-
teghaghnak	pos	IPA	center part of a whale's tail between the flukes	"veghak qamestiighyaqmegtekek teghaghnak siiptuk ‘when they cut up the whale's tail, the left out the center part’; teghaghnak iiklukek angyalgem taglaasimaak ‘they removed the center part between teh whale's flukes, and the captain brought it home’"	тыӷаӷнак
teghhmalleq	pos	IPA	hole for shaft in harpoon point	No information given.	тыҳмьальық
teghhmiikwaaq	pos	IPA	liquid driping from a tilted container	egllumun uqiisikek teghhmiikwaaghllaguuk ‘the stove oil drips from the container that they used to fill the tank’	тыҳмьӣкӱāқ
teghhute-	pos	IPA	to have sexual intercourse	slang -- considered offensive	тыҳуты-
teghhwaaghigh-	pos	IPA	to laugh hard with delight	No information given.	тыҳӱāӷиӷ-
teghig-	pos	IPA	having fun; enjoying oneself	emotional root: teghigyugtuq ‘he's having fun’; teghignaghtuq ‘it’s fun’; teghikaa or teghiyukaa ‘he considers it fun’; teghignatun ‘enjoyably’; Tagi naghaalgusighyaghtughqung. Whani teghignapigtuq! ‘Come play with us. It’s really fun here!’ (SULUWET 19)	тыӷиг-
teghightugh-	pos	IPA	to stalk; to pursue	No information given.	тыӷиҳтуӷ-
Teghiglugsiq	pos	IPA	February; March	also given in one source as April	Тыӷиглюхсиқ
teghigluk	pos	IPA	young bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)	No information given.	тыӷиглюк
teghigniigh-	pos	IPA	to hunt	No information given.	тыӷигнӣӷ-
teghigniqe-	pos	IPA	to have fun; to enjoy something	teghigniquq ‘he’s having fun; enjoying something’ / teghigniqutkaa ‘he's enjoying it’	тыӷигниқы-
teghigsigh-	pos	IPA	to sing a song to attract game (of a shaman)	No information given.	тыӷихсиӷ-
teghiigh-	pos	IPA	to pursue (of dogs pursuing an animal)	No information given.	тыӷӣӷ-
"teghik, teghigaq"	pos	IPA	"game animal (sea or land, not birds)"	Ugingan meghem teghikusaa tamaghhaan unakaqegkanga. Uksungagu nunivagem teghiga unakaqegkanga. ‘Her husband caught all the animals of the sea. When winter came he caught the game animals of the tundra.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 43)	"тыӷик, тыӷигақ"
teghikusaq	pos	IPA	animal (including game animal and dog)	No information given.	тыӷикусяқ
teghingyug-	pos	IPA	to suddenly start to enjoy oneself	"yuuk napinghinnaqngwaaghluni aghulaquutaghtaquyatata qenwat teghingyugluni ellngallu aghulaqumalghii ‘a man wasn’t going hunting at first, but when the others all left, he wanted to go too for the fun, so he too went to go hunting’"	тыӷиңьюг-
teghla	pos	IPA	owl; snowy owl (Nyctea scandiaca)	"Chukotkan; Teghlam tuguluku ellngaasitaq, uugtuq uyghagmun, taagken kuuvaa ellngaasitaq. Maateghhaq meteghlluk tagneghtaa. 'The owl took the container of oily sooty lamp residue, got up on the rock, and then poured it forth. Now the raven became all black.' (AANGHHAQ 28) "	тыӷля
teghleg-	pos	IPA	fastened securely over something	postural root; teghlegtaa 'he fastened it securely over something' / teghlegngaaq 'it is fastened securely over something'	тыӷлыг-
teghlug-1	pos	IPA	to land from the sea onto the beach	teghlugtuq 'it landed' / teghlukan 'if it lands'	тыӷлюг-1
teghlug-2	pos	IPA	to escape under ice (of a struck sea mammal)	unangkaqa teghlugtaa pinaqinaamaluku ‘the seal I hit went under the ice just as I was trying to get it’	тыӷлуг-2
teghlugte-	pos	IPA	to roll one's eyes upwards	teghlugtuq 'he rolled his eyes upwards' / teghlugtekan 'if he rolls his eyes'; cf. tegh-	тыӷлюхты-
teghqig-	pos	IPA	to wipe anal area	teghqigtuq 'he wiped his (own) anal area'; teghqigaa 'he wiped his (another's) anal area' /	тыҳқиг-
teghqiisghaq	pos	IPA	toilet paper; gun wad	No information given.	тыҳқӣсӷақ
teghqilkak	pos	IPA	wheatear (Oenanthe oenanthe); brant (Branta bernicia)	these two very different appearing birds have the same name	тыҳқилькак
teghrughaaq	pos	IPA	"the ""v""-shaped part between the flukes in the tail of a whale"	No information given.	тыӷруӷāқ
teghrughte-	pos	IPA	"to double or shorten a rope by looping it over something, threading the end through the loop and tightening it; to tie loosely"	"sayughqusini taaqluku tugumavigkun teghrughutaa ‘when he was done with the motor starter rope, he tied it loosely it over the handle’"	тыӷруҳты-
teghrughutilleq	pos	IPA	lark’s head knot	No information given.	тыӷруӷутильық
teghruq	pos	IPA	nail puller of a hammer	teghrulek repa naagu ‘where is the hammer with a nail puller’; whaken teghrulegmeng iikigu ‘take it off with this claw hammer’	тыӷруқ
teghsagh-	pos	IPA	to awaken (him); to wake (him) up	teghsaghaa ‘he woke him up’ / teghsanqegtuq ‘he is easy to wake up’; = taghsagh-	тыҳсяӷ-
teghtugh-	pos	IPA	to wake up	teghtughtuq ‘he woke up’ / teghtughtaa ‘he woke him up’; = taghtugh-	тыҳтуӷ-
teghuq	pos	IPA	fleshy part of bird’s tail; notch in end of arrow	"ghhiitalghiini papekullutii taakut teghut aliighaqut ‘when plucking bird’s tail feathers, the fleshy part appears’; used in the dual, teghuk, for the notch of the arrow"	тыӷуқ
tegleg-	pos	IPA	to steal	teglegtuq ‘he stole’; teglegaa ‘he stole it’ / teglegvikaa ‘he stole from her or it’	тыглыг-
teglengsaak	pos	IPA	thief	No information given.	тыглыңся̄к
tegtaan	pos	IPA	working together	particle; tegtaan angyateng sayugteghaqeftiit ‘it appears that they are all together pulling their boat’	тыхтāн
tegyuughiite-	pos	IPA	to not be hesitant to express one’s thoughts; to be outspoken; to be daring	"tegyuughiilnguut sameng piyuneghmeggni legan pimaghmeng ayuqelghiit llangaqa sumeghtaghaghpenateng ‘when those that don’t hesitate to say anything want to say anything, they just do it, kind of like without thinking’"	тыгью̄ӷӣты-
tekagh-	pos	IPA	to have an erection	of humans and animals; cf. tegge-	тыкаӷ-
tekaghreketiigh-	pos	IPA	to continuously flow from small opening in the lower part of container	mesiilghutak ukifkalleghqun tekaghreketiighaqeftuk ‘the fuel tank was leaking out liquid through the hole punctured in it’; angyam mellukutaa iiksaqminigu meq tekaghrekitiightuq ‘when the plug on the boat was removed (one could see that) water started to squirt through’	тыкаӷрыкытӣӷ-
Tekeghaghwaaq	pos	IPA	point on Powooiliak Bay  on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Тыкыӷаӷӱāқ
Tekeghapak	pos	IPA	Tikaghapuk Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	"literally, ‘large (?) point’; see Map 4 in Appendices"	Тыкыӷапак
tekeghaq	pos	IPA	projection of land into water; point of land	No information given.	тыкыӷақ
Tekeghaq	pos	IPA	Tikugha Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Тыкыӷақ
tekeghin	pos	IPA	promonitory jutting out from an ice field	see item 79 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	тыкыӷин
tekeghmigun	pos	IPA	knob on shaft of ivory on small harpoon or spear to which line from harpoon/spear head is attached	No information given.	тыкыӷмигун
tekeghregagh-	pos	IPA	to poke around with the index finger	"qavaanayukan tawavek tekeregaghyaqminigu teghhumaftuq ‘he poked him to see if he might be sleeping, but he was awake’; tekeregaghluku naasiighaa natennayukayek imakek meghutem ‘he put his finger in the can and tasted it to make sure it was not bad’"	тыкыӷрыгаӷ-
tekelek	pos	IPA	one who sews a lot; talented sewer	No information given.	тыкылык
tekeq	pos	IPA	index finger; thimble	No information given.	тыкық
tekerqaq	pos	IPA	point; protrusion; outer corner	No information given.	тыкышқақ
tekeyiighaq	pos	IPA	arctic tern (Sterna paradisaea)	No information given.	тыкыӥӣӷақ
tekghaghte-	pos	IPA	to be swept backwards due to the speed at which something is moving	nasaperaan uyataa tekghaghtuq sukeram angtalanganeng ‘he was going so fast that the string on his hat was swept backwards’	тыкҳаҳты-
tekiina	pos	IPA	the number four (in a counting or finger naming jingle for children)	"cf. tekeq; the entire jingle is: aatati, pututati, aanqaghreki, tekiina, kumlu, aasi, taawra, qilughru, milughru, qughru 'one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten'"	тыкӣна
tekin	pos	IPA	"middle pole of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	Chukotkan (R)	тыкин
tekiqe-	pos	IPA	"to find (it, garment) to be too small"	"kameraangluni tekiqsamikek naavghusaghtuumakek angelghiignun ‘he got a pair of boots, and it was too small for him, so he went back and traded it in for a bigger pair’; amiiqaq niightughyaghluku niillghek tekiqaak ‘they tried stretching a walrus hide, but the stretching frame was too small’"	тыкиқы-
"tekite-, tekiite-"	pos	IPA	"to land (of something thrown, not of birds or planes); to hit"	tekituq ‘it landed’; tekitaa or tekitfikaa ‘it landed on it’ / Tekisami tipelem qaaynganilngughqun sagneghegneng neghumalghii neqekrangllameng. ‘When he (the lazy mouse) landed on the top of the table he ate the bread from the plate.’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 6); Iqulunga aqsamkun tekitunga. ‘I fell and landed on my stomach.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 33)	"тыкиты-, тыкӣты-"
tekranpak	pos	IPA	strong person	"amsakaghtapigesnaghhaguq taana yuggaq tekranpaggaaguq ‘that little man there is a strong person’; tamaakut amsakaghtat palaqegpenaki tekranpaguut ‘don’t underestimate those who are small, they are strong’; cf. tegge-"	тыкшанпак
tekruqaq	pos	IPA	lump or hard spot in flesh	cf. tegge-	тыкшуқақ
telaananga	pos	IPA	sail	No information given.	тыля̄наңа
telaananga-	pos	IPA	to sail	No information given.	тыля̄наңа-
telaaypa	pos	IPA	snare; trap	also used in Chukotka	тыля̄ӥпа
telenwinanga	pos	IPA	saw (cutting tool)	Chukotkan	тылынӱинаңа
temae	pos	IPA	torso; body; close relative; basic part of object	"aghneghet puuneghmeggni temangit samantaqut meghmi ‘when whales surface for air, their bodies are under water’; qamiyem nalighneghqek ayemqughlutek naqam temkek pinightuk ‘part of a sled broke, but the body is good’"	тымаы
temeghnagh-	pos	IPA	to try to cure illness through ritual	No information given.	тымыӷнаӷ-
temeghnaghta	pos	IPA	ritual healer	"ayumiq alignalghiit yuget temeghnaghtenguluki aaptaqiit ‘long ago, they would count on shamans as ritual healers’"	тымыӷнаҳта
temeghte-	pos	IPA	to cut into the flesh when skinning a carcass	No information given.	тымыҳты-
temitenge-	pos	IPA	to sympathize with a loved one who is ill or in trouble	No information given.	тымитыңы-
temkae	pos	IPA	hummock; tussock	temketuqaq ‘hummocky ground’; quyngit temkenginaghqun pangalwaaghtut ‘the caribou are running around only on the ground that is all hummocks’	тымкаы
"temkak, temkaak"	pos	IPA	"men's outer pants of sealskin with hair side out, worn over inner pants of reindeer skin"	this is a dual; the singular would be temkaq or temkaq* (same as the name for the seal)	"тымкак, тымкāк"
temkaq	pos	IPA	old spotted seal (Phoca largha) or ring seal (Phoca hispada)	No information given.	тымкақ
temkasegaq	pos	IPA	piece of sealskin	Chukotkan	тымкасыгақ
temkawaa	pos	IPA	ball; mass	Chukotkan (R); questioned	тымкаӱā
temli-	pos	IPA	to sleepwalk; to talk in sleep	temliiq ‘walked in his sleep’	тымли-
temlilleq	pos	IPA	seam on the front shin part of a boot	Chukotkan (R)	тымлӣльық
temngi	pos	IPA	for no real or particular reason; any old way; without plan or forethought	particle; temngi laalightaagunga ‘I just dropped by for no particular reason’; temngi legan kakimakanga ‘she just sewed it up any old way’	тымңи
temngingu-	pos	IPA	to be nonsense; to be foolish	No information given.	тымңиңу-
temngitwha-	pos	IPA	to act wastefully; to spread lies; to waste time	No information given.	тымңитӱьа-
temsiyaaghagh-	pos	IPA	to smile faintly wanting to laugh but suppressing it	temsiyaaghaghtuq ‘he is smiling faintly’ / temsiyaaghaataa ‘he is smiling faintly at him’; temsiyaaghaatkaa ‘he is smiling faintly about it’	тымсия̄ӷаӷ-
tenema	pos	IPA	cause of something; beginning	nazighaghsiq aqlagham tenemenga ‘February is the beginning of the cold’; sukilpaam tenemenga taakwanteftuq naaygham gginaani ‘at that time auklets begin to be present on the face of the mountain’	тыныма
tengaa-	pos	IPA	to fly around	tengaaguq ‘it flew around’ /	тыңā-
tengaasta	pos	IPA	pilot	No information given.	тыңāста
tengae	pos	IPA	pubic hair	No information given.	тыңаы
Tengagergen	pos	IPA	god figure in Chukotkan stories	Ayumiq aapghaqaat angeghllalghii ighaleqetaaghllak aghtaghaam tunganganilnguq aatgha Tengagergen. … Whangkutanguq Tengagergem ulimaaqeftiinkut. ‘Long ago they used to speak of a huge star that appeared before dawn; its name was Tengagergen. … They’d say that Tengagergem created us.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 44)	Тыңагыргын
tengayuk	pos	IPA	decoration (as on drum) of long hairs from throat of reindeer or caribou	No information given.	тыңаюк
tenge-	pos	IPA	to take off in flight; to fly (off)	"tenguq ‘it took off’ / tengtaa ‘it (the wind) blew it away’; tengutaa ‘he took off with it (airplane) or with her (fellow traveler, passenger)’"	тыңы-
tengegkayuk	pos	IPA	airplane	"a Gambell (and Chukotkan) word; also plural, tengegkayuget, for one airplane; tengegkayuget tengut ‘the airplane(s) took off’; tengegkayuget nalugtut ‘the airplane(s) landed’; Weni tengegkayuklu kaataghsagutuq. Mail-engyagutukutlu utaqlighllagpenaamta. ‘And then the airplane started arriving more often. We began to get mail without having to wait for a long time.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:56); Sivulighmi nekeftelleghmi saama tengaastengi tengegkayuget, kiyaghsimaak maalghuk Amerikaghmi uyughakek Rayt. 'The first to build an airplane for sustained flight were two Americans, the Wright brothers.' (NATEN YUUK 18); = tengkayuk"	тыңыхкаюк
tengengaaghaq	pos	IPA	young bird ready to fly	No information given.	тыңыңāӷақ
tengertaq	pos	IPA	"chilled puree of boiled fish, broth and seal oil"	No information given.	тыңыштақ
tengghu-	pos	IPA	enthusiastic	emotional root; tengghuyugtuq ‘he is enthusiastic’; tengghukaa ‘he is enthusiastic about it’; tengghunaghtuq ‘it makes one enthusiastic’	тыңӷу-
tengghuniqe-	pos	IPA	to have fun	No information given.	тыңӷуниқы-
tengilghaaghqe-	pos	IPA	to make dust or debris fly around; to cause many birds to fly off	"aghuliightek mallaq tengilghaaghqaghsi ‘stop, you all are making the dust fly around’; sukilpaq tamaa naghuyam tengelghaaghqaa ‘the sea gulls are making the auklets  fly off’"	тыңилӷāҳқы-
tengkayuk	pos	IPA	airplane	"a Savoonga word; also plural, tengkayuget, for one airplane; tengegkayuget tengut ‘the airplane(s) took off’; tengkayuget nalugtut ‘the airplane(s) landed’; = tengegkayuk"	тыңкаюк
tenglepegragh-	pos	IPA	to tap	No information given.	тыңлыпыграӷ-
tenglug-	pos	IPA	to punch with one's fist	tenglugaa ‘he punched him’ /	тыңлюг-
tenglugtugh-	pos	IPA	to knock on the door	No information given.	тыңлюхтуӷ-
tengneq	pos	IPA	recluse; savage; lesser spirit	"the spirit is rarely  seen, but does goes in anywhere (whereas a tughneghaq is said to only  go into clean houses)"	тыңнық
tengngaak	pos	IPA	deep hollow sound such as distant thunder	"… temngi tengngaagtaghllequnga nalighmeng lengaaghtaghllequnga piniqinghilkuma. ‘… just pointlessly I will be making hollow thundering sounds or I will be making ringing noises (“I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal”) If I don’t have love.’ (1 Corinthians 13.1)"	тыңьāк
tengqalluk	pos	IPA	"windy, wet weather with water blown about from the sea"	No information given.	тыңқальюк
tengug-	pos	IPA	to box; to fight with fists	yugek tengugutuk ‘the two men are boxing’	тыңуг-
tenguk	pos	IPA	liver	No information given.	тыңук
tenguqe-	pos	IPA	to strain (as when defecating or giving birth)	No information given.	тыңуқы-
tengutkalek	pos	IPA	the very person that got something	"tengutkalek naangusaqunaan salin neghigatuq ‘don’t finish it, the person (who made it) hasn’t eaten yet’; wiin ayvelek utaqateggu, enankin tengutkalgulghii ‘wait for the person who got the walrus, after all, he’s the one who got it’"	тыңуткалык
tengvi	pos	IPA	wrongly; opposite	"particle, apparently occuring only with certain (Yupik) endings: tengvimun ‘in the wrong direction, against the grain’: tengvimun amiiram melqwi qigughiit ‘they remove the hair from an animal hide by scraping against the grain’; tengvimun qikmim melqwa mesuunaa ‘he combed the dog's fur the wrong way’; also, tengvimteggun ‘in as much as we acted wrong socially’: Tengvimteggun, whangallu ilataghtekaagunga. Tengvimteggun aga ii-i qayughllak alingesluta qeleghluta. ‘In as much as we misbehaved, I too had joined in. We misbehaved and therefore they put fear into us, chastising us.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:20)"	тыңви
tenmaawi-	pos	IPA	to become accustomed to something	tenmaawiiq ‘he's grown used to something ‘/ tenmaawitaa ‘he's grown used to it’; = tinmaawi-	тынмāӱи-
tenpae	pos	IPA	nailhead	tuquuqaq una tenpengituq ‘this nail has no head’; this is a direct nominalization of tenpe-	тынпаы
tenpe-	pos	IPA	to hit hard (not with the hand or fist); to crash into	tenpaa ‘he hit it hard’ / tenputaa ‘he hit it onto something’; tengegkayuget tenputut ‘the airplane crashed into something’	тынпы-
tenuupa	pos	IPA	silver fox (Vulpes fulva var.)	Chukotkan	тынӯпа
tepaan	pos	IPA	ice that has drifted ashore or has been blown against solid ice	see item 80 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	тыпāн
tepae	pos	IPA	odor; smell; aroma	tepnga or tepanga ‘its smell’	тыпаы
tepaq	pos	IPA	edible seashore life found on beach (such as a sea squirt; not an animal carcass)	No information given.	тыпақ
tepe-	pos	IPA	to drift ashore; to wash ashore	tepuq or tepaa ‘it drifted ashore’ / Uupa elngaatall tepaa. ‘Sea peaches are being washed ashore in quantity.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 161)	тыпы-
tepelluk	pos	IPA	putrid smell; foul smell; stink; bad odor	No information given.	тыпыльюк
Tepetapetaghhaat	pos	IPA	site northwest of Okikak Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Тыпытапытаҳāт
tepkegtaq	pos	IPA	good aroma	No information given.	тыпкыхтақ
tepluk	pos	IPA	wild celery (Angelica lucida)	used as a medicinal herb 	тыпльюк
tepnaghuq	pos	IPA	anything that has been washed ashore; beached fossilized ivory	esnighqwaghlunga tepnaghungunga iqeghtaqegtapigtuq ‘I went beach combing and found a piece of beached fossilized ivory with good coloring’	тыпньаӷуқ
Tepraagek	pos	IPA	site on Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Тыпшāгык
tepraak	pos	IPA	strange bad smell	No information given.	тыпшāк
teptaakrak	pos	IPA	eulachon (Thaleichthys pacificus)	No information given.	тыптāкшак
teptaaqe-	pos	IPA	to tie something with a string and a stick on which to wrap the end of the string back and forth to hold it in place	No information given.	тыптāқы-
teq	pos	IPA	anus; bottom	"Quutmeng awavaqaanlluteng teghhakun tuutkat, … ‘A short way from shore it [the ice floe] hit on the bottom [of the water] (i.e. ran aground), …’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:122)"	тық
teqlighaq	pos	IPA	the very last and lowest one; the very bottom	"kayalqiiraaghullghiini teqlighagpenateng pimalghiit ‘in the competition, they did not place at very bottom the bottom’"	тықльиӷақ
tequq	pos	IPA	urine	tequghpagnituq ‘it smells of urine’	тықуқ
teraamae	pos	IPA	drum; oil drum; tank	"also dual, teraamek, for one drum; also used in Chukotka"	тырāмаы
terangiq	pos	IPA	warm weather in winter	"terangiqagu angyaghnaghlleqaa ‘when it gets warm (during winter), it will be good for boating’"	тыраңиқ
terateriiq	pos	IPA	dunlin (Calidris alpina); rock sandpiper (Calidris ptilocnemis)	No information given.	тыратырӣқ
teregh-	pos	IPA	to mark with a line; to make a line on something	No information given.	тырыӷ-
terelleq	pos	IPA	line; boundary	Aghviqakun aagluni ayuquq terilleq. ‘The boundary (between Russia and the US) is just a matter of going over the International Date Line.’ (AANGHHAQ 142)	тырыльық
tereq	pos	IPA	mark; line; tatoo	Chukotkan; terghet ‘cheek tatoo(s)’	тырық
terghii-	pos	IPA	to touch slightly when shooting or throwing at something rather than gettting an exact hit; to graze	unangkani terghiiluku unguvaastaqaq nangteghluku tuqusimakanga ‘he finished off killing the seal that he had just grazed’	тырӷӣ-
terqaq	pos	IPA	board with a groove in it	No information given.	тышқақ
terqitaak	pos	IPA	squeaky sound like fingers in wet hair or someone gritting his teeth	No information given.	тышқитāк
terugi-	pos	IPA	to draw	terugiiq ‘he is drawing’; terugii ‘he is drawing it’ /	тыруги-
terugista	pos	IPA	illustrator	No information given.	тыругиста
tesakemna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under sakemna	тысякымна
tesamna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  saamna	тысямна
teskana	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  kaana	тыскана
teskiwna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  kiiwna	тыскиӱна
tespagna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  paagna	тыспагна
tespamna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  paamna	тыспамна
tespikna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  piikna	тыспикньа
tesqagna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  qaagna	тысқагна
tesqakemna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  qakemna	тысқакымна
tesqamna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  qaamna	тысқамна
tesqawna	pos	IPA	No information given.	look under  qaawma	тысқаӱна
tetagh-	pos	IPA	to mark at an exact point for cutting	"pilalghiit aghveghmeng sivukluku tetaghteghluku ungughtelighluteng tetagheghqun makreghqughaqluku ‘the people butchering the whale  first marked exactly where to cut, and then cut the piece off with the help of the one’s pulling’"	тытаӷ-
teteghaq	pos	IPA	marker (sharpened piece of ivory used to mark wood for cutting)	teteghaghaqluku unaghsighllak quupumakanga ‘he marked the big piece of wood with a sharp piece of ivory and he cut it’	тытыӷақ
tetug-	pos	IPA	to be reluctant to ask; to hesitate to ask; to be bashful	"Apeghtughistesi tetugpenaki aaptaqiteki sangwat liigikenghinneghpesiki ‘don’t hesitate to ask to the schoolteacher if you don’t understand something; tetugtaatmineng sameng piighaghtiigalnguq ‘due to reluctance to ask for things, he doesn’t do things immediately’"	тытуг-
teve-	pos	IPA	to go over a hill; to overflow	tevuq ‘he went over’; tevaa ‘he went over it’ / teftaa ‘he draped it over something’	тывы-
tevegh-	pos	IPA	"to be stiff (of arm, leg, etc.)"	"ighunga teggusighngalghii qapragmun tevepigtuq ‘his leg is splinted, so it is stiff’"	тывыӷ-
Tevelquk	pos	IPA	saddle between Yaghmelngak Mtn. and Olnooseenuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Тывыльқук
Tevelqum Naayghaa	pos	IPA	mountain slightly to the east of Myghapowit Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Тывыльқум Нāӥӷā
Tevetleq	pos	IPA	site on Akeftapak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Тывытльық
tevigh-	pos	IPA	to set (of sun or moon)	tevightuq ‘it set’ / Maaten ilangani iiwen siqineq tevighyaghtughaquq qemimeng agigsalghiimi kana neghllak esghaamakanga. ‘One day as the the sun was setting she peeked over a hill and saw a large village.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 158)	тывиӷ-
teviitaq	pos	IPA	youth who starts to “go over” the stretched gymnastic rope in competitions and is celebrated for this	tevyaaghsuwhaaghem quyasii teviitaq ‘one who is just starting to go over the ropes uses the celebration for happiness’	тывӣтақ
Tevleghak	pos	IPA	Tiflighak Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 7 in Appendices	Тывлыӷак
Tevlighaq	pos	IPA	site on the Itegran Is. side of Chechekuyem Strait in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Тывлиӷақ
tevlun	pos	IPA	banded gunnel (Pholis fasciata)  or stippled gunnel (Rhodymenichthys dolichogaster) 	"exact identification uncertain, might be either fish or both"	тывлюн
tevluq	pos	IPA	rapids; steep gradient in a river	"iqalluget tevlumi ghhataqaghluteng alpakayuget ‘fish would have to jump over the rapids and steep gradients to get through’; kiiwem ilangi tevlughtuqat ilangan tevlii uusqaghaqluteng ‘some rivers have a lot of rapids, and some of their gradients are really steep’"	тывлуқ
tevneq	pos	IPA	one loop on a rope	Chukotkan (R)	тывнық
Tevnga	pos	IPA	portage route from Kange Camp (Kangii) across neck of land to south side of St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Тывңа
tevragh-	pos	IPA	to hunt seals on ice	tevraghnaluni qakiqniqaqeftuq ‘he is planning on going seal-hunting’	тывраӷ-
tevraq	pos	IPA	hunter on the sea ice	No information given.	тыврақ
tevugha-	pos	IPA	to overflow	"qaltagni unillukek takuyaqminikek enmis tevughaaqeftuk ‘he left his bucket and when he came back for it, it was overflowing’; qagit sama qaasqameng tevughaluteng llighumaat ‘the waves down at the west beach are now flowing over the bank’"	тывуӷа-
tevyaghaq	pos	IPA	moutain pass	igleghtat tevumaat tevyaghaq ‘the travelers went over the pass’	тывьяӷақ
tiguyngae	pos	IPA	wick adjuster for seal oil lamp; stick or antler piece used for spreading out an old garment as a doormat over snow at door of house	No information given.	тигуӥңаы2
tiig-	pos	IPA	to peel a layer off of something; to remove outer garment	"tiigtuq ‘he peeled off a layer from something, removed his outer garment’; tiigaa ‘he peeled a layer off of it, removed his (someone else's) outer garment’ / tiigutuq ‘he peeled off layers, removed layers of clothing’"	тӣг-
tiigghun	pos	IPA	"rope that holds rock stabilizing weight to the circumference belt of a the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	variant tiigghuteneq	тӣгӷун
tiighqe-	pos	IPA	to remove outer garment because of getting hot	"uksumi nemeng uyavani puqlayugngaaghmeng tiighqigatut ‘in the winter, when far away from home, they don’t remove the outer layer of their clothes, even if they are hot’"	тӣҳқы-
tiigmeraagh-	pos	IPA	"to wear thin, light clothing"	No information given.	тӣгмырāӷ-
tiinta	pos	IPA	tent	"Ellngitneng kiyaghsaghqaaghtestaqiit, taawanginaq tiintameng, egllumeng, avlawa sangwaa, kagimkaq …. ‘They had them live on their own, with a tent, stove, flour, sugar, …’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:60); Umegneghuluku tiintaluteng nayughiiqut. ‘During a snowstorm we’d watch over [the reindeer] using a tent. (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:98)"	тӣнта
tiipelae	pos	IPA	table	"the dual, tiipelek, is used for one table; = tipela"	тӣпылаы
tiiwhte-	pos	IPA	to turn and present a narrow profile in place of a broad profile	"un’ga awavani telaanangat tiiwhsalghiimeng aviighutut talughtut ‘when the sailboat far out there turned and then presented a narrow profile, it couldn’t be seen any more’"	тӣхӱты-
"tiiwri, tiiwrin"	pos	IPA	"main pole in the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	"тӣӱри, тӣӱрин"
tikelae	pos	IPA	block and tackle	"Chukotkan (V&E); used in the dual, tikelek, for one such unit"	тикылаы
tilma	pos	IPA	eagle	exact identification undetermined; also translated as ‘sea-eagle’ and ‘kite’	тилма
tinmaawi-	pos	IPA	to become accustomed to something	= tenmaawi-	тинмāӱи-
tipelae	pos	IPA	table	"the dual, tipelek, is used for one table;  tipelegni ‘on the table’;  Tipelem qaayngani taawa aynganangak qipuqayugek. ‘On top of the table was a wind-up phonograph.’ (PANGEGH. 31); = tiipela"	типылаы
tiwlapa	pos	IPA	dish of reindeer intestines that are boiled with blood and reindeer tallow	Chukotkan (R)	тиӱляпа
tufliq	pos	IPA	slipper	Chukotkan (R); tuflik ‘pair of slippers’	туфлиқ
tugaasiq	pos	IPA	crowbar	Chuktokan (R)	тугāсиқ
"tugaasiq, tugaan"	pos	IPA	ice pick (spud)	No information given.	"тугāсиқ, тугāн"
tugagh-	pos	IPA	to use an ice pick;  chip ice with an ice pick	tugaghtuq ‘he used an ice pick’; tugaghaa ‘he used an icepick on it’ / = tugegh-	тугаӷ-
tugaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to chip repeatedly with an ice pick	No information given.	тугаҳтуӷ-
tugaq	pos	IPA	ice pick (spud)	#NAME?	тугақ
tugegh-1	pos	IPA	to chip with an ice pick; to push on the ice pack breaking it up (of ocean current)	= tugagh-; iighwilngwaaq  tugaqwaa sigiqaa ‘the current is breaking the ice pack’	тугыӷ-1
tugegh-2	pos	IPA	to be too big to fit in	aangelghiimeng pikenguq tugeghyamikek ‘she got a bigger one when she got too big for them’	тугыӷ-2
tugeghraasiq	pos	IPA	makeshift ice pick	No information given.	тугыӷрāсиқ
tugeghyagte-	pos	IPA	to be small and tight (of clothes)	"kaamgegni mekelliighaniitem tugeghyagtaak ‘his boots are starting to be so tight, because they are getting smaller for him’"	тугыӷьяхты-
tugeq 	pos	IPA	ice pick (spud)	#NAME?	тугық
tugg	pos	IPA	bang	"the sound or noise children use in situations where ""bang"" would be used in English; = tum"	тух
tughneghaam ayaviigha	pos	IPA	mushroom	literally ‘devil’s cane’	туӷныӷам аявӣӷа
tughneghaam sigutanga	pos	IPA	toadstool	literally 'devil's ear’; note that the same idiom used in Central Yup'ik Nunivak dialect where ‘toadstool’ is tuunram ciutii 	туӷныӷāм сигутаңа
tughneghaq*	pos	IPA	shaman's familiar spirit; devil; Satan	"Pimakanga, “Alingegpenang.  Tughneghaanghitunga.  Yuguunga nunakun piyukayuk.” ‘She said to him, “Don’t be afraid. I am not a shamanic spirit. I am a human who can walk on earth.”’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:24); Ateghpegun aanesquqaqaput tughneghaat uglalghiineng yugneng. ‘In Your name we drove many devils out of people.’ (Matthew 7.22)"	туӷныӷақ
tughumgha-	pos	IPA	to wrestle (with)	tughumghaaq ‘he is wrestling’; tughumghaa ‘he is wrestling with him’ / tughumghatuk ‘they2 are wrestling’; tughumghasta ‘a wrestler’	туӷумӷа-
tughwaagh-	pos	IPA	to get nearer	igaghyaghvik tughwaaghtuq ‘school time is getting near’; nunavaget tughwaaghluki sikukun ayakitut ‘they got near a herd of walrus but were blocked by the ice’	туӷӱāӷ-
tugilleq	pos	IPA	place where someone has used an ice pick	No information given.	тугильық
tugmaghtisiq	pos	IPA	funeral	Chukotkan (R)	тугмаҳтисиқ
tugmagte-	pos	IPA	to store away for later use; to kill (him) and bury or conceal the body	tugmagtuq ‘he stored something away’; tugmagtaa ‘he stored it away’ /	тугмахты-
tugu-	pos	IPA	to take with the hand; to grab; to pick up; to take as a wife	tugaa ‘he took it’ / tugutuq ‘he took something’; tugiiguq ‘he took something he shouldn't have taken’; tugutuk or tugututuk ‘they got married’	тугу-
tugukligh- 	pos	IPA	"to take in (orphan, guest); to grab onto something to keep from falling"	tuguklighaa ‘he took him in; he grabbed onto it’ /	тугукльиӷ-
tugulagh-	pos	IPA	to take continually or repeatedly	tugulaghaa ‘he kept taking it’ /	тугуляӷ-
tugulaghvike-	pos	IPA	to take things from (him)	tugulaghvikaa ‘he took things from her’	тугуляӷвикы-
tugulegh-	pos	IPA	to molest sexually; to grope (sexually)	No information given.	тугулыӷ-
tugulghaagh-	pos	IPA	to wrestle; to hug	tugulghaaghtuq ‘he is wrestling with someone’; tugulghaaghaa ‘he is wrestling with him’ /	тугулӷāӷ-
tugulghute-	pos	IPA	to fight; handle (him) roughly	No information given.	тугулӷуты-
tugumavik	pos	IPA	"handle; bail (arched handle of bucket, pot, etc.)"	No information given.	тугумавик
tugumiighun	pos	IPA	valued item taken by bride when she moves in with her inlaws; dowry	No information given.	тугумӣӷун
tugumiiq	pos	IPA	thing held in the hand	No information given.	тугумӣқ
tugumiiqe-	pos	IPA	to hold in the hand or hands; to be fastened to an ice cake (of boat); to take with one	"Aghnam aqeftaghaaghegni tugumiiqlukek estugaghtuq. ‘Taking her purse with her, the woman went to the store.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 31)"	тугумӣқы-
tugun	pos	IPA	tusk; ivory	tugutetuqaq ‘one with big tusks’; Enraq ilangita tugutangi ayveghem mengqutun uulqaghtaaghaqegkangit. ‘However others would turn walrus tusks inside out with a popping noise.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 152)	тугун
tuguneq	pos	IPA	handful; fistful; pinch of something	tugungha taghyum ‘a pinch of salt’	тугунық
tuguniigh-	pos	IPA	to handle roughly; to grapple with; to act on in order to kill (of a shaman)	No information given.	тугунӣӷ-
tugusnaq	pos	IPA	one who takes other peoples belongings without their knowledge	"tugusnalghiit aneghneghsigatut, ilateng qivghuliiqiit ‘those who take other peoples things without their knowledge don’t end up well; they just make their families feel bad’"	тугуснақ
tugutaq	pos	IPA	pot holder; handle	No information given.	тугутақ
tugutelleq	pos	IPA	winnings; prize	Chukotkan (V&E)	тугутыльық
tugutluk	pos	IPA	fossilized tusk; old ivory item; artifact of ivory	"Kaviingnaquteperewaaghllak, katam maaten tugutluggnaqeghllallemtestun. ‘Getting foxes was important, just as today our trying to find old ivory (artifacts) is important. (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:174)"	тугутльюк
tuguvik1	pos	IPA	"handle; bail (arched handle of bucket, pot, etc.)"	No information given.	тугувик1
tuguvik2	pos	IPA	longitudinal stringer or riser of skin boat to which walrus skin is laced; rail on inside of skin boat below gunwale	No information given.	тугувик2
tukaate-	pos	IPA	to get sick from eating incompatible foods (such as land greens and sea greens)	tukaatuq ‘he got sick from eating incompatible foods’; tukaataa ‘it made him sick’ /	тукāты-
tukagh-	pos	IPA	to stamp one's feet; to dance	tukaghtuq ‘he stamped his feet’; tukaghaa ‘he stamped his feet on it’ / the meaning ‘to dance’ is Chukotkan (R)	тукаӷ-
tukaghsiiq	pos	IPA	short loop of rope holding harpoon head to shaft	cf. tukaghta	тукаҳсӣқ
tukaghta	pos	IPA	ten-fathom rope on a whaling harpoon attaching harpoon to first float	"also used in the dual, tukaghtek, for one such rope; cf. tukaghsiiq"	тукаҳта
Tukaghtangighvik	pos	IPA	site in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Тукаҳтаңиӷвик
tukegh-	pos	IPA	to brace with one's foot; to stretch a skin by dampening it and sitting on it holding the edge and pushing out with one's heel; to hatch (of egg)	tukeghtuq ‘he's bracing himself with his foot; it (egg) hatched’; tuukghaa ‘he's bracing his foot against it’ /	тукыӷ-
tukeghiitaq	pos	IPA	"foundation column, short,  for lower part of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	Chukotkan (R)	тукыӷӣтақ
tukeghragh-	pos	IPA	to kick repeatedly with both feet (like a baby does)	No information given.	тукыӷраӷ-
tukeghraq	pos	IPA	treadle sewing machine	"used in the dual, tukeghrak, for one sewing machine"	тукыӷрақ
tukeqagh-	pos	IPA	to shove or kick with one's foot	tukeqaghtuq ‘he shoved something with his foot’; tukeqaghaa ‘he shoved it with his foot’ /	тукықаӷ-
tukfigh-	pos	IPA	to buy	tukfighaa ‘he bought it’ / tukfighiiq ‘he made a purchase’	тукфиӷ-
tukfighaq	pos	IPA	store-bought thing	No information given.	тукфиӷақ
tukfightugh-	pos	IPA	to give gifts to the parents of one's son's wife-to-be; to pay the bride-price	No information given.	тукфиҳтуӷ-
tukfightuusiq	pos	IPA	bride-price item or gift	No information given.	тукфиҳтӯсиқ
tukiitaa-	pos	IPA	to have no place to stay when in another town; to not have a host	"akmavek aghvighyuwhaaghuluni tukiitaamaniiquq ‘he says that when he first went to another town he didn’t have a place to stay’; tukiitaakuvek taakut esgha tukughqat ‘when you don’t have a place to stay, here are people to stay with’"	тукӣтā-
tukmagh-	pos	IPA	to trample	"Chukotkan (R,V&E); cf. tutmagh-"	тукмаӷ-
tukrug-	pos	IPA	to harden by drying	No information given.	тукшуг-
tukrugsigh-	pos	IPA	to allow to dry	No information given.	тукшухсиӷ-
tukrugtaq	pos	IPA	piece of meat that has been dried indoors	No information given.	тукшухтақ
tukruk	pos	IPA	meat or skin hardened by drying	No information given.	тукшук
tukrukaag-	pos	IPA	to be somewhat hard	No information given.	тукшукāг-
tukrunpak	pos	IPA	"athletic, agile person"	cf. tukrug-	тукшунпак
tukughaq	pos	IPA	ankle; bottom part of pants; back flipper joint	No information given.	тукуӷақ
tukughayngwaaq	pos	IPA	shoe	"Chukokan (R,V&E) tukughayngwaaghek ‘pair of shoes’"	тукуӷаӥңӱāқ
tukughnak	pos	IPA	edible sea life type	exact identification undetermined	тукуӷнак
tukuq	pos	IPA	host; the person one stays with as a guest	tukaa ‘his host’; tukii ‘his hosts’	тукуқ
tukuqe-	pos	IPA	to arrive as a guest; to be a guest of (him/her))	"tukuquq ‘he arrived as a guest (literally, has a host)’; tukuqaa ‘he is her guest’ /"	тукуқы-
tukuste-	pos	IPA	to flex or tense all of one's muscles	"tukustuq ‘he tensed up, hardened his muscles’ /"	тукусты-
tulaagh-	pos	IPA	to put splint on something broken	"qamiymi ighunaa ayemyan quugsimeng tulaaghluku kaatutkumakanga ‘when one of the legs of his sled broke, he secured it with a stick tied on to it and he got home fine with it’"	туля̄ӷ-
tulag-	pos	IPA	to slash; to cut	tulagtuq ‘he slashed something’; tulagaa ‘he slashed it’ /	туляг-
tulimaq	pos	IPA	rib; rainbow	the meaning  ‘rainbow’ is Chukotkan	тулимақ
tullumegtaq	pos	IPA	"braid, four-stranded, of sinew"	avleqaghtam uskaaghi ivalunguut tullumegtekat ‘bolo strings are made of four-stranded sinew braids’	тульюмыхтақ
tullumek	pos	IPA	"front roof support in the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	тульюмык
tullumkegtaq	pos	IPA	symmetrical object; cube; cylinder	No information given.	тульюмкыхтақ
tulquraq	pos	IPA	knot; tied bundle	No information given.	тульқурақ
tulugh-	pos	IPA	"to hone, whet or sharpen"	tulughaa ‘he sharpened it’ / tulughiiq ‘he sharpened something’	тулюӷ-
tulughagh-	pos	IPA	to nod when sitting and falling asleep	"tulughaghtuq ‘he is sleepily nodding his head’; cf. nulugh-, tuluumsiighte-"	тулюӷаӷ-
tulughyak	pos	IPA	canine tooth	"Nanuum melqwatun melqulegllak, ayveghem tugutangatun tulughyagllagkek, …. ‘It had shaggy fur like a polar bear’s fur, big canine teeth like a walrus’s tusk.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 30)"	тулюӷьяк
tuluumsiighte-	pos	IPA	to take a nap	"tuluumsiighlluni teghtughyalghiimi aghtaghaghaqeftaa ‘after he took a nap when he woke up he noticed that it was becoming daylight’; cf. tulughagh-, nulugh-"	тулю̄мсӣҳты-
tum	pos	IPA	bang	"the sound or noise children use in situations where ""bang"" would be used in English; = tugg"	тум
tumaaghite-	pos	IPA	to get or have a lot of tracks or footprints	"kaviighmun neqesghani esghaghyaqminiki naqam tumaaghilluteng naaptegpenateng ‘when he saw his fox bait, there were a lot of tracks in the area, but nothing had been caught’"	тумāҳиты-
tumae	pos	IPA	footprint; track; trail; way; path; road	often plural for one trail or road;  tuumngitni or tumangitni ‘on their trail’	тумаы
tumag-	pos	IPA	to taste bitter	tumagtuq ‘it is bitter ‘/	тумаг-
tumagreghagh-	pos	IPA	to pack for a trip	Chukotkan (R); cf. tuma	тумагрыӷаӷ-
tumangani	pos	IPA	on the way	particle; literal or figurative meaning; Taagken igleghsimalghii. Tumangani tagitugisimakanga. 'Then he went. On the way the fog lifted.' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 27); Tumangani unugyatni eslami aghuliighlaataghtuq. 'On the way when night came upon him he stopped outdoors.' (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 16)	тумаңани
tumelqusiq	pos	IPA	the entire time spent on a journey	No information given.	тумыльқусиқ
tumighqaate-	pos	IPA	to return to St. Lawrence Is. from Chukotka or vice-versa	"Taagken apeghiinghata tawaten atughllaneghmeng, tumighqaannaqneghmeggni, taglaghtuunnaqneghmeggni, tumighqaannaqniiqut.’ After singing (and dancing) when they [the Chokotkans] were ready to go home, they’d announce that they were ready to go home.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:140)"	тумиҳқāты-
tumigte-	pos	IPA	to return to St. Lawrence Island from Chukotka or vice-versa	cf. tuma	тумихты-
tunagmik	pos	IPA	bribe	slang	тунагмик
tunak1	pos	IPA	palm of hand	No information given.	тунак1
tunak2	pos	IPA	smooth trail	No information given.	тунак2
tunallagute-	pos	IPA	to fall on one's buttocks; 	tunallagutuq ‘he fell on his buttocks’ / cf. tunu	тунальягуты-
tune-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > tunqugh-, tunusaq, tuune-"	туны-
tunemaq	pos	IPA	foundation	cf. tuneq	тунымақ
tuneq	pos	IPA	mat; floor covering	"used in the plural, tuunghet, or in the dual for one mat"	тунық
tungae	pos	IPA	immediate vicinity; close relative but outside immediate family; area toward	"tunganga ‘its vicinity, his relative’; tunganganun ‘toward it’"	туңаы
tungangigh-	pos	IPA	to come near to	tungangighaa ‘he came near it’ / 	туңаңиӷ-
tungangiite-	pos	IPA	to be in line with something; to line up with something	tengegkayuget naaygham qagughruganun tungangiitut ‘the airplane is in line with the corner of the mountain’	туңаңӣты-
tungeqliq*	pos	IPA	next one	No information given.	туңықльиқ
tungik	pos	IPA	ivory piece between head and shaft of whaling harpoon where it fits into the giimaq (socket)	No information given.	туңик
tunglae	pos	IPA	frost barrier of cut grass tied at the outer side of reindeer hide door; short hair at hairline	"Chukotkan; used in the plural, tunglet"	туңлаы
tunglu	pos	IPA	broken-up ice that has moved in next to shore thus obstructing all travel	No information given.	туңлю
tungqaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to hit close to the mark (literally or figuratively)	No information given.	туңқаӷаҳты-
tungsigh-	pos	IPA	to ask for	tungsightuq ‘he asked for something’; tungsighaa ‘he asked for it’ /	туңсиӷ-
tungtu	pos	IPA	caribou (Rangifer tarandus)	caribou are found in Chukotka but rarely encountered on St. Lawrence Is.	туңту
Tungtum Qalghighviga	pos	IPA	October	"Chukotkan; literally, ‘time when the caribou issues its cry’; also listed in various sources as September-October, and November"	Туңтум Қалӷиӷвига
tungtuqu-	pos	IPA	to hunt caribou	No information given.	туңтуқу-
Tungtut	pos	IPA	Big Dipper (and associated stars) constellation; Ursa Major	"literally: ‘caribous’; Tawatennguq Tungtutgun ayghughtut. Aghhneghani siqinghem tunganganun igleghtaqluteng. ‘They traveled north, using the Big Dipper as their guide. During daylight hours they traveled toward the sun.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:122) "	туңтут
tungtuvak	pos	IPA	moose (Alces alces)	moose are found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.	туңтувак
tungu-	pos	IPA	to stare vacantly into space; to daydream	tunguuq ‘he is or was daydreaming’ /	туңу-
tungunghaqe-	pos	IPA	to sleep deeply and soundly	tungunghaqunneghsighluki ilani aanuq ‘he waited for his others to get into a deep sleep and then he left’	туңунӷақы-
tunguuya	pos	IPA	dog or chum salmon (Oncorhynchus keta)	No information given.	туңӯя
tungyuq	pos	IPA	high tide	No information given.	туңьюқ
tungzigh-	pos	IPA	to flare out; to fan out	No information given.	туңзиӷ-
tungzighaq	pos	IPA	rough border area of ice field onto which it is hard to pull game; barrier that obstructs	see item 82 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	туңзиӷақ
tunqugh-	pos	IPA	to donate generously	No information given.	тунқуӷ-
tunqughta 	pos	IPA	contributor; philanthropist; sponsor (monetary); funder or funding agency	No information given.	тунқаҳта
tunu	pos	IPA	back; area behind	cf. tunallagute-	туну
"tunughaq, tunughaaq"	pos	IPA	quartz or other white rock	No information given.	"тунуӷақ, тунуӷāқ"
Tunuliik	pos	IPA	pond in central area of present-day Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Тунулӣк
tunupightagh-	pos	IPA	to keep one’s back turned to others	kaynguyugemllu entaqun tunupightaghtuq ‘perhaps it is because of bashfulness that she’s keeping her back turned to the others’	тунупиҳтаӷ-
tunuq	pos	IPA	reindeer or caribou back fat	"Ilungan tunaaneng uulsimiita imiqayuget. Qellungi tamaakut ama uulsimiita, tunughtuqat. ‘These can be turned inside out and filled with its (the reindeer’s) fat. The large intestine is also turned inside out, and has a lot of fat (on it).’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:96)"	тунуқ
tunuqaq	pos	IPA	back side of house	No information given.	тунуқақ
tunuqaraak	pos	IPA	small room at the back of the house entered from outside and used for working or storage	No information given.	тунуқарāк
tunuqin	pos	IPA	makeshift structure at rear of house; strip of red-dyed polar bear skin sewn onto back of skin pants	No information given.	тунуқин
tunuqliq*	pos	IPA	thing at the rear	No information given.	тунуқльиқ
tunuquvinghaq	pos	IPA	tallow	Chukotkan (R)	тунуқувинӷақ
tunurriitaq	pos	IPA	meaty part of upper whale gum; “oyster” (so-called) of baleen	#NAME?	тунушӣтақ
"tunusaq, tunusiitaq"	pos	IPA	gift	No information given.	"тунусяқ, тунусӣтақ"
tunusitaq	pos	IPA	meaty part of upper whale gum; “oyster” (so-called) of baleen	#NAME?	тунуситақ
tunusugkugh-	pos	IPA	to hit on the back of head	Chukotkan (R)	тунусюхкуӷ-
tunusuk	pos	IPA	back of neck and head	No information given.	тунусюк
tunute-	pos	IPA	to turn away; to turn one's back on (him)	tunutuq ‘he turned away’; tunutaa ‘he turned away from her’ /	тунуты-
tunuvagh-	pos	IPA	to go back; to take back	saghyat tunuvaghiit qagineng ‘they took the things out of the reach of the waves’ 	тунуваӷ-
"tupag-, tupagpag-"	pos	IPA	to get startled	tupagtuq or tupagpagtuq ‘he got startled’ / tupagtaa or tupagpagtaa ‘he startled her’	"тупаг-, тупахпаг-"
tupagpagtagh-	pos	IPA	to have convulsions; to jerk one's body in sleep	No information given.	тупахпахтаӷ-
tupeq	pos	IPA	makeshift shelter	No information given.	тупық
"tupeqaag-, tupeqwaag-"	pos	IPA	to be clumsy or awkward or stiff	No information given.	"тупықāг-, тупықӱāг-"
"tupeqaak, tupeqwaak"	pos	IPA	bulky or awkward thing	tupeqwaak usi ‘bulky load’	"тупықāк, тупықӱāк"
tupnguugh-	pos	IPA	to move from natural environment due to being bothered or from excessive traffic nearby (of wild animal)	tungemta ukum qawaaga tupghuughtuq igleghtem leveklugem ‘our area’s birds have gone because of traffic and noise from vehicles’	тупңьӯӷ-
tuqaa-	pos	IPA	"to feel ""high""; to eclipse (of moon or sun)"	"tawaqatupagluni tuqaamalghii ‘he took lots of tobacco and feels ""high""’; tanqiq tuqaanaquq ‘there’s going to be a lunar eclipse’"	туқā-
tuqaallngwaaghagh-	pos	IPA	to stand motionless; to lose consciousness	Chukotkan (R)	туқāльңӱьāӷаӷ-
tuqlugh-	pos	IPA	to call out to; to telephone	"tuqlughaa ‘he called to him, telephoned him’ / tuqlughiiq ‘he called out’"	туқльюӷ-
tuqlughaasiq	pos	IPA	flag; signal flag used in whaling	No information given.	туқльюӷāсиқ
tuqlughagh-	pos	IPA	to call loudly	No information given.	туқльюӷаӷ-
tuqlughragh-	pos	IPA	to call repeatedly	No information given.	туқльюӷраӷ-
tuqluusiq	pos	IPA	telephone	"used in dual, tuqluusik, for one telephone"	туқлью̄сиқ
tuqu-	pos	IPA	to die; to ferment	"tuquuq ‘he died’ / tuqumaaq ‘he has died’; tuqungaaq ‘he is dead’; there seems to be a variant, tuqwa- as in tuqwaaq ‘he died’, tuqwaluku ‘after he died’, etc.; … nunivak saghnaaqegkangat tuqusighaqluki. Awen ungipaqaqanka laluramkenun nunivaget tuqusighaqniluki akmaagutakun. Tuquneghmeggni mesii qugaaghqwaakayuguniluki, ilangi katam juice-estun ayuqniiqanka. ‘… roseroots had to be picked at that time and set aside to ferment. I told some white men about the kegs we used to ferment our roseroots in. When they fermented they got tangy.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:90)"	туқу-
tuqufkagh-	pos	IPA	to knock out	tuqufkaghtuq ‘he knocked himself out’; tuqufkaghaa ‘he knocked him out’ /	туқуфкаӷ-
tuqukaq	pos	IPA	corpse	No information given.	туқукақ
tuquma-	pos	IPA	to be dead	tuqumaaq ‘it is dead’ / 	туқума-
tuqumastiq	pos	IPA	corpse; dead person	No information given.	туқумастиқ
tuqumsiyug-	pos	IPA	to have a close brush with death; to almost die	No information given.	туқумсиюг-
tuqumyighaqaq	pos	IPA	one who is half-dead; unconscious one	Chukotkan (R)	туқумӥиӷақақ
tuqunagh-	pos	IPA	to be poisonous	No information given.	туқунаӷ-
tuqunaq	pos	IPA	poison	No information given.	туқунақ
tuqunghaaghaq	pos	IPA	"frail dog, other animal, or person"	No information given.	туқунӷāӷақ
tuquraag-	pos	IPA	to knock out	Chukotkan (R)	туқурāг-
tuqutaq	pos	IPA	freshly killed carcass	No information given.	туқутақ
tuqute-	pos	IPA	to kill	tuqutaa ‘he killed it’ / tuqusimaaq ‘it has been killed’; tuqutiiq ‘he killed something’; tuqutkaq ‘killed thing’	туқуты-
Tuqutighvik	pos	IPA	August	"Chukotkan; literally, ‘time for slaughter (of reindeer); also given in various sources as July-August, September, (and even November!)"	Туқутиӷвик
Tuqutiighvik	pos	IPA	September; October	"literally, ‘time for killing (reindeer?)’"	Туқутӣӷвик
tuqutngwaagh-	pos	IPA	to laugh heartily	nenglaghnaghqullghiit yiillgitneng tuqutngwaaghutkumakangi ‘he laughed hard about them acting comically’	туқутңьӱāӷ
tuquuqagh-	pos	IPA	to drive nail into (it)	tuquuqaghaa ‘he drove a nail into it’ / tuquuqaataa ‘he nailed it to something’	туқӯқаӷ-
tuquuqaq	pos	IPA	nail (wood fastener)	Pillugaghtet tuquuqaasamegteggu Jesus qaquuramun …. ‘When the soldiers nailed Jesus to the cross ….’ (John 19.23)	туқӯқақ
tuquyug-	pos	IPA	to be deathly ill	No information given.	туқуюг-
tuquyuk	pos	IPA	deathly ill person or animal	No information given.	туқуюк
turi	pos	IPA	dory	No information given.	тури
turiik	pos	IPA	American golden plover (Pluvius dominica)	No information given.	турӣк
turituriq	pos	IPA	flint for making fire	Chukotkan; questioned	туритуриқ
tusaqe-	pos	IPA	to hear and comprehend	tusaquq ‘he heard’; tusaqaa ‘he heard her’ / cf. tuuslagh-	тусяқы-
tusaqesighwaagh-	pos	IPA	to ignore it when told to do something acting as though one didn’t heard	enraq kevgaqnaqegkaput tusaqesingwaaghllaget ‘the ones who were going to do something for us are acting as though they didn’t hear’	тусяқысиӷӱāӷ-
tusaqneghllug-	pos	IPA	to misunderstand; to hear incorrectly	No information given.	тусяқньыҳльюг-
tusigagh-	pos	IPA	to attend a gathering	perhaps originally a shaman's session	тусигаӷ-
tusigalliqe-	pos	IPA	to be mischievous	No information given.	тусигальиқы-
tusigate-	pos	IPA	"to be comical, witty, or entertaining"	tusigatuq ‘he is witty’ /	тусигаты-
tusigatun	pos	IPA	comically	particle	тусигатун
tusineq	pos	IPA	hairless area on either side of head at top of forehead	tusinghek nuyiighutekestaghaqeftaak ‘he is beggining to lose hair on both sides of his upper forehead’	тусинық
tusite-	pos	IPA	to inform (him)	ilasi tusitaghlluki pilghaasi ‘tell the other people’; tusitiyaghtuumalghii kiwa mallu tepniluku ‘he went to tell people that there is a beached walrus east of here’	туситы-
tusugniite-	pos	IPA	to have no news	"tengegkayuget taginaqnikangit salin tusugniitaqut ‘they say the airplane was supposed to get in, but there’s no news lately about them’; cf. tusaqe-, tusite-"	тусюгнӣты-
tutaqi	pos	IPA	matress pad	neghighluku taghnughhaat tutaqilighluki allighiit qavaghtestaqiit allighat aghisnayuukatki ‘long ago they would place something on children’s matresses to keep them from getting them wet’	тутақи
tute-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > tutaqi, tuute-1, tutemqaq, tutmagh-,tutmavik"	туты-
tuteg-	pos	IPA	to get side-by-side with; to get parallel to	"tuutgaa ‘he got side-by-side with him’ / tutegluku ‘getting side-by side with it, or parallel to it’; tuutgutuk ‘they2 got side-by-side with each other’"	тутыг-
tutegtaq	pos	IPA	item packed side-by-side with similar items	estugaghmeng tutegtameng avlawanguq ‘he got a package of flour at the store from the packages that are situated side by side’	тутыхтақ
tutegvik	pos	IPA	dock; berth at pier	No information given.	тутыгвик
tutemqaq	pos	IPA	porch; step-stool	tutemqat ‘porch steps’	тутымқақ
tutmagh-	pos	IPA	to step several times; to walk all over something; to tread upon	No information given.	тутмаӷ-
tutmaghwaagh-	pos	IPA	to search for roots stored by mice in underground caches by stepping around feeling for hollow spots beneath the ground's surface	No information given.	тутмьаӷӱāӷ-
tutmavik	pos	IPA	mat; rug; floor covering	No information given.	тутмьавик
tutu	pos	IPA	vagina	No information given.	туту
tutugh-	pos	IPA	folded over with a crease.	postural root; tutughtaa ‘he folded it over’; tutughngaaq ‘it is folded over’	тутуӷ-
tuufqagh-	pos	IPA	to smoke while inhaling the smoke and breathing heavily	No information given.	тӯфқаӷ-
tuufqaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to eat quickly	taayugniighem tuufqaghtaghluni angyaghtuq ‘he was in a hurry so he ate quickly and then went boating’; tuufqaghtaqiinaghluni qayughluni aanuq ‘he only ate quickly and had tea and then went out’	тӯфқаҳтаӷ-
tuufsaq	pos	IPA	gull hook	the gull swallows fat which is used as bait on a hook on a line	тӯфсяқ
tuufte-	pos	IPA	to swallow something accidently; to choke on something; to have hiccups	tuuftuq ‘he choked on something’ or ‘he has hiccups’ or ‘he swallowed something’; tuuftaa (or tuufutkaa) ‘he choked on it’ or ‘he swallowed it   accidently’ /	тӯфты-
tuugkaq	pos	IPA	ivory; toggling harpoon head	No information given.	тӯхкақ
tuugtaq	pos	IPA	walrus hide and meat ball (for storage)	No information given.	тӯхтақ
tuugte-	pos	IPA	to bundle securely; to make walrus hide into a ball by putting holes around the edge and drawing a string tightly through it; to tighten a parka hood around the face	"tuugtuq ‘he is bundling something securely, he is tightening his hood’; tuugtaa ‘he is bundling it’ / Siqlugalguluta neqa manguna tamaana tuugqughluku. ‘We had meat cellars for food and walrus skin with flesh on it that we’d draw into a ball for storage.’ (MRS. DELLA W. 10)"	тӯхты-
tuumke-	pos	IPA	to make a stop for	tuumkaa ‘he made a stop for her’ / 	тӯмкы-
tuumngiighhaq*	pos	IPA	little trail	"used in the plural, tuumngiighhaat, for one trail"	тӯмңӣҳақ
tuumte-	pos	IPA	to follow; to track; to follow a path in life	tuumtaa ‘he tracked it’ / tuumtiiq ‘he tracked something’ 	тӯмты-
tuune-	pos	IPA	to give	tuunaa ‘he gave it’ / Aghnaghaq iteghyan aghnam tunuq tuunaa ‘when the girl came in the woman gave (her) the tallow’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:198); tuuniiq ‘he gave something’; aghnam ugiminun salngak tuunaa ‘the man gave the box to the woman’	тӯны-
tuungliq	pos	IPA	next one; following one	No information given.	тӯңлиқ
tuungqaq	pos	IPA	relative; kin	No information given.	тӯңқақ
tuungsagte-	pos	IPA	to come near; to approach	Neghestim Aghnegha tuungsagtuq ‘it’s almost Thanksgiving Day’; aghvilleghqani tuungsagniiqaa ‘she says that her departure is coming near’	тӯңсяхты-
tuunun	pos	IPA	gift	No information given.	тӯнун
tuusaghaq	pos	IPA	obstacle	Chukotka (R)	тӯсяӷақ
tuusaq	pos	IPA	"step; stool; whale vertebra used as a step; block at bottom of pole supporting roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.)"	No information given.	тӯсяқ
tuuslagh-	pos	IPA	to be hard of hearing; to be deaf	tuuslaghtuq ‘he has trouble hearing’ / cf. tusaqe-	тӯсльяӷ-
tuusliite-	pos	IPA	to hear well	No information given.	тӯсльӣты-
tuutaqu-	pos	IPA	to step lightly and repeatedly; for a gentle rain to fall	No information given.	тӯтақу-
tuute-	pos	IPA	to step on; to put a foot on; to land on the ground; to fall (rain); to clean a skin by laying it on the snow and stepping on it; to claim	tuutuq ‘it landed’; tuutaa ‘he stepped on it’ / tuutaa itegamineng tutmaviggaq nuqneghumaan ighneghmi aallgumaluku iqanga ‘he put his foot on the mat to hold it as his son brushed the dirt off of it’; elngaatall tuutuq tesqakma ‘the rain is really coming down hard outside’; Kingulighpigaak estugaghmelnguuk aghvigisik tuutagka. ‘I claimed the last washing machine at the store.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 164)	тӯты-
tuutneq 	pos	IPA	longitudinal stringer nearest keel in bent-rib boat; chine stringer in flat-bottom boat; longitudinal brace of the kayak’s frame; triangle-shaped tatoo on the cheek near corner of mouth; hole for labret 	No information given.	тӯтньық
tuuymig-	pos	IPA	to carry on one’s shoulder(s); to nudge with shoulder	No information given.	тӯӥмиг-
tuvaghnaaq	pos	IPA	small stretch of shorefast ice	see item 83 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	туваӷнāқ
tuvalluk	pos	IPA	slushy shore ice	No information given.	тувальюк
tuvaq	pos	IPA	"large stretch of shorefast ice, staying for a long time, sometimes surrounding a small island"	see item 84 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	тувақ
tuvghaq	pos	IPA	hunter out on the ice (in contrast to one hunting by boat); dependable person; reliable partner	"Taana Pangawyi amalka tuvghaqluku, ataasiighpagtekaayalghiit. Pinaayankut, Veghtekaankut. ‘Pangawyi was their partner; they were as one, with Pinaaya and Veghtekaq.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:12)"	тувӷақ
tuviilleq	pos	IPA	shore ice that has broken loose from the shore	see item 85 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	тувӣльық
tuwaayae	pos	IPA	twine	also used in Chokotka	туӱāяы
tuya-	pos	IPA	to bob up and down; to throb; to shake with suppressed laughter; to shiver	"tuyaaq ‘he or it is bobbing, throbbing, shaking or shivering’ / cf. tuyae"	туя-
tuyae	pos	IPA	shoulder	tuuska ‘my shoulder’; tuyegka ‘my shoulders’; tuuynga or tuyanga ‘his shoulder’; tuuskek ‘his shoulders’	туяы
"tuyapegtagh-, tuyepegtagh-"	pos	IPA	to have a tremor	No information given.	"туяпыхтаӷ-, туӥыпыхтаӷ-"
tuyeftu-	pos	IPA	to be broad-shouldered	No information given.	туӥыфту-
tuyelliqe-	pos	IPA	to have aching shoulders	No information given.	туӥыльиқы-
tuyepgha-	pos	IPA	"to jolt (boat, sled, wheeled vehicle, plane)"	cf. tuyae	туӥыпгҳа-
tuyugh-	pos	IPA	to send; to go to join a boat crew	tuyughtuq ‘he went to a join a boat crew’; tuyughaa ‘he sent it’ /	туюӷ-
tuyuusaq	pos	IPA	package that has been sent	No information given.	тую̄сяқ
uflugh-	pos	IPA	to run one's hand or fingers over (it)	uflughaa ‘he ran his hand over it’ / uflughiiq ‘he ran his hand over something’; = eflugh-	уфльюӷ-
uflughaagh-	pos	IPA	to repeatedly run one's hand over (it)	No information given.	уфльюӷāӷ-
ufsug-	pos	IPA	to shake or brush off dirt or snow	ufsugtuq ‘he is shaking himself off’; ufsugaa ‘he is cleaning the dirt or snow from her’ / ufsugutaa ‘he is cleaning it (garment or boat (turned upside down)) in this way’; = efsug-	уфсюг-
ufsugun	pos	IPA	"stick used to knock snow or dirt off of garment, boots or boats; snow-beater"	#NAME?	уфсюгун
ufsugutaq	pos	IPA	"stick used to knock snow or dirt off of garment, boots or boats; snow-beater"	#NAME?	уфсюгутақ
ufsulqutagh-	pos	IPA	to flutter	ufsulqutaghtuq or ufsulqutaghaa ‘it is fluttering’ /	уфсюльқутаӷ-
Ugaliit	pos	IPA	a particular clan	also called Laakaghmiit	Угалӣт
ugatae	pos	IPA	area near the exit (of possessor)	ugatngani or ugatangani ‘in the area toward its exit’	угатаы
ugate-	pos	IPA	to move (including where water exits to ocean)	No information given.	угаты-
ugeyiighaq	pos	IPA	male oldsquaw duck (Clangula hyemalis)	No information given.	угыӥӣӷақ
uggiiy	pos	IPA	sigh of tiredness or frustration	exclamatory particle	ухӣӥ
ugharrae	pos	IPA	mud	"Naangan pimakanga, ""Kii, ugharra uugna ilutmun ullghitaghtuq, naqam afsengaghestun gginalighluni."" ‘His mother said to him, “Gee, that (ball of) mud has rolled in here, with a face like a mouse.”’ (IGHSANI. AFSENG. 15)"	уӷашаы
ughhaaqghun	pos	IPA	inset piece to enlarge a garment	Chukotkan (R)	уҳāқҳун
ughhe-	pos	IPA	to urinate	ughhuq ‘he's urinating’; ughhaa ‘he's urinating on it’ /	уҳы-
ughhmaataq	pos	IPA	urethra	No information given.	уҳмāтақ
ughleghiigh-	pos	IPA	to work very hard; to suffer anguish	ughleghiightuq ‘he is working very hard’ /	уӷлыӷӣӷ-
ughluveq	pos	IPA	bow (as used with arrow)	"Mekelghiighhaam iqa qerngughlluku, ulimamakanga yuggaq. Taaqumakanga. Taagken ughluvengllaghluku, aaygungllaamakani. ‘The little boy gathered mud and fashioned a little man. He finished it. Then he made a bow for it and arrows.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 61)"	уӷлювық
ughluvin	pos	IPA	shaft of bow; one side of sealskin-stretcher made from whale rib	No information given.	уӷлювин
ughnek	pos	IPA	handiwork; sewing; that which one is working on	"also used in the dual, ughnegek, for one piece of work; ughnega or ughnegkek ‘her sewing, the thing she is sewing’; Ughnegegka pegllukek ggutangighyaghtughtunga. ‘I left my sewing and went to have a tooth pulled out.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 165)"	уӷнык
ughu	pos	IPA	moss; menstrual pad	No information given.	уӷу
ughug-	pos	IPA	to melt; to thaw; to warm up	ughugtuq or ughugaa ‘it melted’ / ughugtaa ‘he melted it’; ughugtiiq ‘he melted something’; ughugutuq ‘it is emerging from being frozen in the ice’; Nekevghaanga maatneghsiisim saaghwani ughugnalunga. ‘I stood by the radiator to get warm.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 166)	уӷуг-
ughugesnaq	pos	IPA	sleet; wet snow	No information given.	уӷугыснақ
ughugsigh-	pos	IPA	to thaw (it); to warm oneself	ughugsightuq ‘he warmed himself up’; ughugsighaa ‘he thawed it out’ /	уӷухсиӷ-
ughumaaghte-	pos	IPA	to perspire; to sweat	No information given.	уӷумāҳты-
ughumaangllagh-	pos	IPA	to work up a sweat	No information given.	уӷумāңльяӷ-
ughumeruk	pos	IPA	fine moss	No information given.	уӷумырук
ughunqightughte-	pos	IPA	for there to be thawed patches	ughunqightughtemmi ‘when there are thawed patches’	уӷунқиҳтуҳты-
ughunqiq	pos	IPA	melted spot; thawed spot; bare spot on the ground where the snow has melted	No information given.	уӷунқиқ
ughuun	pos	IPA	"melting ice field in spring, with surface elevations alternating with holes through to sea below"	see item 86 on list in Oozeva et al. 204	уӷӯн
ughvik	pos	IPA	old-style scraper for skins	"also used in the dual, ughvigek, for one scraper"	уӷвик
ughvugh-	pos	IPA	to rinse; to wash one’s body	ughvughaa ‘he rinsed it’ /	уӷвуӷ-
ughvughqe-	pos	IPA	to bathe	ughvughquq ‘he bathed’; ughvughqaa ‘he bathed him’ /	уӷвуҳқы-
ughvughqefik	pos	IPA	place to take a bath; bathroom	No information given.	уӷвуҳқыфик
ughvughqusiq	pos	IPA	bathtub	"also used in the dual, ughvughqusik, for one bathtub"	уӷвуҳқусиқ
ughvuneq	pos	IPA	chunks of ice that loosen and float up to the surface from underneath a field of ice in spring	see item 87 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	уӷвунық
ughyugh-	pos	IPA	to spit (on); for water to seep out of ice	ughyughtuq ‘he spit’; ughyughaa ‘he spit on it’ / ughyuutaa ‘he spit it out’; Nguuyngaaghaq qanemnun iitqaaghsan ughyuutaqa. ‘I spit out the fly that went into my mouth.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 166)	уӷьюӷ-
ughyulleq	pos	IPA	spittle	No information given.	уӷьюльық
ughyuneq	pos	IPA	ice shard; chalk; limestone; white excrescence on tundra	No information given.	уӷьюнық
ughyuqaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to spray; to spill	Chukotkan (R)	уӷӥуқаҳтаӷ-
ughyuusiq	pos	IPA	spittoon	No information given.	уӷью̄сиқ
ugi	pos	IPA	"husband; male seal, walrus or reindeer"	uginga ‘her husband’; ugika ‘my husband’; ugilguuq ‘she has a husband’; ugingunani ‘(she) not having a husband’	уги
ugighhe-	pos	IPA	to maul; to fight (of dogs)	ugighhaa ‘it fought it’ / ugighhiiq ‘it fought another dog or another animal or a person’; ugighhutut ‘they fought each other’; ugighhelleqaa ‘it will fight it’; ugighhelleq ‘scar from biting or fighting’	угиҳы-
ugighhniigh-	pos	IPA	to growl; to snarl	ugighhniightuq ‘it snarled’; ugighhniighaa or ugighhniighutaa ‘it snarled at it’	угиҳньӣӷ-
ugighhughtaa-	pos	IPA	to fight viciously	ugighhughtaagaa ‘it viciously fought it’ / 	угиҳуҳтā-
ugighsagh-	pos	IPA	to be fierce	… taawanginaq ugighsalghiistun amaastun ayuqut. ‘… inwardly they are like ravenous wolves.’ (Matthew 7.15)	угиҳсяӷ-
ugiigh-	pos	IPA	to get a husband; to get married (of a woman)	ugiightuq ‘she got a husband’ /	угӣӷ-
ugilgun	pos	IPA	woman’s husband’s brother’s wife	No information given.	угилгун
ugingighaq	pos	IPA	widow	No information given.	угиңиӷақ
ugingwaaq	pos	IPA	exchange husband	No information given.	угиңӱāқ
ugini	pos	IPA	the roar of polar bear or other large animal	No information given.	угини
ugini-	pos	IPA	to roar; to growl	uginiiq ‘it roared’ / uginitaa ‘it roared at it’	угини-
ugiyulek	pos	IPA	woman who is said to be married to a dead man's spirit which provides for her	No information given.	угиюлык
ugkae	pos	IPA	cooked food	ugkekaghqaq ‘food ready for cooking’	ухкаы
ugkelli-	pos	IPA	to cut meat into pieces sized for cooking 	No information given.	ухкыльи-
uglafqe-	pos	IPA	to get confused; to scatter; to separate into parts (as when butchering a carcass)	uglafquq ‘he got confused’; uglafqaa ‘he scattered it’ /	угляфқы-
uglagh-	pos	IPA	to be many; to be numerous; to be much	uglalghiit ‘lots; many’; may be used in the singular to indicate that a singular noun is being used for a plurality as in: Sivuqami sikik uglaghtuq. ‘On St. Lawrence Is. there the squirrels are numerous.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 3);  Tamaani uglalghii maakumii qepghaatkaaguq … ‘Many local people worked there …’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:52)	угляӷ-
uglaghi-	pos	IPA	to increase in number; to multiply; to become more	No information given.	угляӷи-
uglaghtala	pos	IPA	the number of something; the quantity of something	No information given.	угляҳталя
uglaghyagaq	pos	IPA	large group; crowd	No information given.	угляӷьягақ
uglaq	pos	IPA	large number or amount; many; much; large quantity	"Uglaq mesiiq atuqaqaat nanimun, …. ‘They used lots of oil for the lamps, …’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:112)"	угляқ
uglaqaghtagh-	pos	IPA	to acquire lots of something	No information given.	угляқаҳтаӷ-
uglave-	pos	IPA	to spread out; to disperse	uglavuq ‘it dispersed’ / uglavutut ‘they dispersed in different directions’; = ulave-; cf. uglaq	углявы-
uglavngalghii	pos	IPA	"floes of ice, large and small, that have separated from each other, leaving much open water in between"	see item 88 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	углявңалӷӣ
uglavniqe-	pos	IPA	"to be overwhelmed by a large number (of tasks to be done, people, etc.)"	No information given.	углявниқы-
uglavyug-	pos	IPA	"to be overwhelmed by a large number (of tasks to be done, people, etc.)"	No information given.	углявьюг-
ugme-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > ugmelghu, ugmelli-, ugmestaaghhaq, ugmitaghaq; cf. umu-"	угмы-
ugmelghu	pos	IPA	thick sea ice	Chukotkan	угмылӷу
ugmelli-	pos	IPA	to become or make thinner	No information given.	угмыльи-
ugmesiiq	pos	IPA	flat (thing)	Chukotkan (R)	угмысӣқ
ugmestaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	thin thing	ugmestaaghhaaguq ‘it is thin’	угмыстāҳақ
ugmetaghaliq	pos	IPA	traditional reindeer herders’ ceremony held after coralling of reindeer	"Chukotkan (V&E, R)"	угмытаӷалиқ
ugmetaghaq	pos	IPA	"thin ice where in some places one can walk, and in some places one cannot"	see item 89 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	угмытаӷақ
ugpegh-	pos	IPA	to believe; to be or become a Christian; to have faith	"ugpeghtuq ‘he believes, has become a Christian’ / ugpeghtaa ‘he made her believe’; ugpeghnaghtuq ‘it is believable’; ugpeghyugumaaq ‘he is gullible’"	ухпыӷ-
ugpeqaq	pos	IPA	Christian; believer; cloth cover parka; snowshirt	"the meaning ‘cloth cover parka or snowshirt’ is Chukotkan; Qiipaghaput maakut whatelnguut Ugpeqameng atighluki aghniita. Ugpeqaghhalegnunllu akingit tawaten. ‘Their [the Chukotkans’] women called the snowshirts we wore “Christians” [because they looked like ministers’ frocks]. They would say, “I’d like to trade such and such for a “Christian”.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:134); used in the dual, ugqeqak, for one such snowshirt"	ухпықақ
ugpeqe-	pos	IPA	to believe (it or him)	ugpeqaa ‘he believes it or her’ /	ухпықы-
ugraaq	pos	IPA	herring gull (Larus argentatus)	No information given.	угрāқ
Ugriileq	pos	IPA	former village site near Ureliki in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Угрӣлық
ugtinghaq	pos	IPA	red-dyed de-haired sealskin	No information given.	ухтинӷақ
ugu-	pos	IPA	to get irritated (of skin); to get burnt; to ripen	"uuguq or uugaa ‘it is burnt, irritated, ripe’ /"	угу-
ugugnaghaq*	pos	IPA	shrew (Sorex sp.)	No information given.	угугнаӷақ
uguma-	pos	IPA	to be boiling	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	угума-
ugumi	pos	IPA	how annoying!	exclamatory particle	угуми
ugumi-	pos	IPA	hateful; angry; frustrated; finding something cute	"emotional root; ugumiyugtuq ‘he feels hatred, frustration or anger’; uguminaghtuq or uguminaghnaghtuq ‘he is frustrating, makes one feel anger’ or ‘ it is cute’ (!); ugumiketaghtuq ‘he hates people, is misanthropic’; ugumiyagutaa ‘he is angry at it’ or ‘ he finds it cute’ (!); Nagaquqaqaghsi whaten pilleq, “Piniqluki ilakumtaasi, ugumikluki ugumikilghiit elpesineng.” Iwernga whanga piimsi, “Piniqluki ugumikilghiit elpesineng,” ‘You’ve heard it said, “Love your friends, and hate those who hate you.” But I say to you, “Love those who hate you,” (Matthew 5.43-44) "	угуми-
ugumiite-	pos	IPA	to be angry at	No information given.	угумӣты-
ugumikeraagh-	pos	IPA	to reject at play; to treat badly	No information given.	угумикырāӷ-
uguminaghhalek	pos	IPA	how annoying!	exclamatory particle	угуминаҳалык
uguminaqruggalek	pos	IPA	how hateful!; how discouraging!	exclamatory particle	угуминақшухалык
uguminqe-	pos	IPA	to be very angry	No information given.	угуминқы-
ugumiqrutun	pos	IPA	in a disgusting way	Chukotkan (R); particle	угумикшутун
ugumisaate-	pos	IPA	to stir up anger against	No information given.	угумися̄ты-
uguqe-	pos	IPA	to burn one's flesh	uguqelleq ‘burn on the flesh’ 	угуқы-
uguqnagh-	pos	IPA	to be burning hot	uguqnaghtuq ‘it is burning hot’ /	угуқньаӷ-
ugusaghqaq	pos	IPA	something that is to be cooked thoroughly	No information given.	угусяҳқақ
ugute-	pos	IPA	to get done (in cooking); to cook or be cooked	"ugutuq ‘it is done, cooked’ or ‘he is finished cooking’ / ugutaa ‘he finished cooking it’ /"	угуты-
ugutelngae	pos	IPA	chain	"Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, ugutelnget, for one chain"	угутылңаы
ugutkaq	pos	IPA	cooked food	No information given.	угуткақ
uka	pos	IPA	this way; toward here	look under uukna; ukani ‘in the area toward here’	ука
ukaaq	pos	IPA	son's wife (daughter-in-law); brother's wife (sister-in-law)	cf. ukughhaq	укāқ
ukaliq	pos	IPA	one on this side; person at the bottom of the social scale	No information given.	укалиқ
ukamaataq	pos	IPA	towline	No information given.	укамāтақ
ukamagh-	pos	IPA	to tow a boat by walking along the shore	ukamaghtuq ‘he is towing a boat’; ukamaghaa ‘he is towing it’ /	укамаӷ-
ukapighqaagh-	pos	IPA	to move closer	No information given.	укапиҳқāӷ-
ukatghute-	pos	IPA	to miss the mark by one's shot falling short; to undershoot	No information given.	укатҳуты-
ukavagh-	pos	IPA	to come nearer; to approach; to lessen in value; to be demoted	"ukavaghtuq ‘it came nearer’ / ukavaghtaa ‘he brought it nearer, lessened it’; anuqa ukavaghtaa ‘the wind died down’"	укаваӷ-
ukazighaq	pos	IPA	baby rabbit (hare)	No information given.	указиӷақ
"ukazighniigh-, ukazighyagh-"	pos	IPA	to hunt rabbits (hare)	No information given.	"указиӷнӣӷ-, указиӷяӷ-"
ukaziq	pos	IPA	snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus); rabbit (locally)	the snowshoe hare is found in Chukotka but not on St. Lawrence Is.; Tawaten ukazighhaq igiighsimakangat siqineghmeng teglegesqelluku. ‘Then they encouraged the little hare and told him to go steal the sun.’ (YUPIGET UNGIP. 31)	указиқ
uki-	pos	IPA	to get a hole	ukiiq ‘it got a hole in it’ / ukitaa ‘he made a hole in it’; ukimaaq ‘it has a hole’	уки-
ukifkagh-	pos	IPA	to puncture	No information given.	укифкаӷ-
ukig-	pos	IPA	to go down; to descend (an incline)	ukigtuq ‘he went down’ / ukigtaa ‘he took it down’; ukigvikaa ‘he went down it or via it’; ukigutaa ‘he brought it down’	укиг-
ukigagh-	pos	IPA	"to go up and down a cliff on a rope, especially when gathering eggs"	No information given.	укигаӷ-
Ukigyaghaq	pos	IPA	former village at the southwestern corner of Nayvak (the lagoon with old Chaplino at its eastern corner) in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Укигьяӷақ
Ukiivak	pos	IPA	King Island	see Map 1 in Appendices	Укӣвак
ukileghyak	pos	IPA	spotted animal or skin	No information given.	укилыӷяк
ukimalleq	pos	IPA	hole; pit	intentionally made	укимальық
ukini-	pos	IPA	to sew	Chukotkan	укини-
ukinista	pos	IPA	seamstress	Chukotkan	укиниста
ukinivik	pos	IPA	sewing workshop	Chukotkan	укинивик
ukiqrugh-	pos	IPA	to get lots of holes	No information given.	укиқшуӷ-
ukiqute-	pos	IPA	to poke through or show through by making holes in what covers it	No information given.	укиқуты-
ukistagh-	pos	IPA	to use an ice pick (spud)	No information given.	укистаӷ-
ukistaq	pos	IPA	ice pick (spud)	No information given.	укистақ
ukite-	pos	IPA	to make hole in (it); to pierce	ukitaa ‘he made a hole in it’ / ukiqughaa ‘he made holes in it’	укиты-
ukivagh-	pos	IPA	to approach	Chukotkan (R)	укиваӷ-
uklesa	pos	IPA	zipper	No information given.	укльыса
ukma-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > ukmangigh-, ukmangite-"	укмьа-
ukmangigh-	pos	IPA	to clean	Egllumta gaarineghqek ukmangighagka. ‘I cleaned out our stove’s ashes.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 50)	укмьаңиӷ-
ukmangiisiq	pos	IPA	cleaning apparatus or supply	"used in the plural, ukmangiisit, for a set of cleaning equipment and supplies"	укмаңӣсиқ
ukmangite-	pos	IPA	to be clean; to be immaculate	No information given.	укмьаңиты-
uksaagh-	pos	IPA	to be autumn	No information given.	укся̄ӷ-
uksaaghte-	pos	IPA	to spend the autumn	No information given.	укся̄ҳты-
uksaaq	pos	IPA	autumn; fall season	uksaaq as a particle: ‘last autumn’	укся̄қ
uksaaqestagh-	pos	IPA	for autumn to begin	No information given.	укся̄қыстаӷ-
uksaaqun	pos	IPA	next autumn	particle	укся̄қун
uksugh-	pos	IPA	to be winter	No information given.	уксюӷ-
uksughqestaaq	pos	IPA	place having short winters	No information given.	уксюҳқыстāқ
uksughte-	pos	IPA	to spend the winter	No information given.	уксюҳты-
uksughtelleq	pos	IPA	year	No information given.	уксюҳтыльық
uksughtutala	pos	IPA	one's age	uksughtutalanganeng aaptaqa ‘I asked him about his age’	уксюҳтуталя
uksulla	pos	IPA	common eider (Somateria mollissima)	cf. uksuq	уксюлья
uksuq	pos	IPA	winter; year; last winter	"uksumi ‘in the winter’; uksulqusiq ‘all winter’; uksuq as a particle, ‘last winter’"	уксюқ
uksuqaate-	pos	IPA	to be caught by winter	No information given.	уксюқāты-
uksuqun	pos	IPA	next winter	particle	уксюқун
ukughhaq	pos	IPA	new bride who has recently moved in with her husband's family	cf. ukaaq	укуҳақ
ukughhite-	pos	IPA	to have recently married and moved in with one's husband's family	No information given.	укуҳиты-
"ukughsi, ukughsiiy"	pos	IPA	hey you (plural)!	vocative particle; look under una	"укуҳси, укуҳсӣӥ"
ukukuk	pos	IPA	ouch!	exclamatory particle	укукук
ukut	pos	IPA	these	look under una	укут
ulaagh-	pos	IPA	to align so that (it -- narrow object) can enter an opening; to turn edgewise or on its side	No information given.	уля̄ӷ-
Ulaaghnarraak	pos	IPA	Oolamushak Hill on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Уля̄ӷнашāк
Ulaaghpak	pos	IPA	Oolahpuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Уля̄ҳпак
ulaapsak	pos	IPA	small woman’s semi-lunar knife	Chukotkan	уля̄псяк
ulaaq	pos	IPA	woman's semi-lunar knife; ulu	"… ulaaghmineng pilagaghsaqminikek ratamiirak vegaaq pagunghaq ifkaquusimalghii. ‘… ‘when she slashed the parka with her big Eskimo knife, out fell grass and berries.’ (SULUWET 80); cf. ulag-"	уля̄қ
ulag-	pos	IPA	to cut with a woman's semi-lunar knife	ulagaa ‘he cut it’ / cf. ulaaq	уляг-
Ulaghpen	pos	IPA	mountain near Sireniki in Chukotka	see Map 2 in Appendices	Уляӷпын
ulakitaagh-	pos	IPA	to tag; to play tag	ulakitaaghtuq ‘he played tag’; ulakitaaghaa ‘he tagged him’ /	улякитāӷ-
ulakitaaq	pos	IPA	game of tag	No information given.	улякитāқ
ulangkiiq	pos	IPA	parting ritual of young people where each tries to be the last to touch the other	cf. ulakitaagh-	уляңкӣқ
ulape-	pos	IPA	to exercise physically outdoors; to strengthen oneself	ulapuq ‘he exercised’ / ulapfik ‘place to exercise’	уляпы-
ulave-	pos	IPA	to spread out; to disperse	Chukotkan (R); = uglave-; cf. uglaq	улявы-
ulevaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to be fully laden; to load full up	ulevaghaghtuq ‘it is full’; ulevaghaghtaa ‘he filled it up’ / Entaqun maaken angyaghpaga ulevaghaghngaaqelghii akilpegameng. ‘Maybe his ship would be loaded full up with trade goods.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:134)	улываӷаҳты-
uleve-	pos	IPA	to flood; to overflow	"ulevuq ‘it overflowed’ / ulevutaa ‘it overflowed on it, flooded it’; uleftaa or ulevestaa ‘he made it overflow’"	улывы-
ulghaaghaghaq	pos	IPA	young sea lion (Eumetopias jubatus)	No information given.	улӷāӷаӷақ
ulghaaq	pos	IPA	sea lion (Eumetopias jubatus)	No information given.	улӷāқ
ulig-	pos	IPA	to cover with a blanket	uligtuq ‘he covered himself with a blanket’; uligaa ‘he put a blanket on it’ / taghnughhaam uligutaa qikmighaghhaq ‘the child blanketed the little puppy along with himself’	улиг-
uliigh-	pos	IPA	to put on hunting boots	No information given.	улӣӷ-
uliiq	pos	IPA	"man's waterproof, sealskin, knee-high, fur-out hunting-boot"	No information given.	улӣқ
ulik	pos	IPA	blanket	No information given.	улик
ulima-	pos	IPA	to make; to build; to carve; to fix	ulimaaq ‘he made something’; ulimaa ‘he made it’ / Igaghvik taaqaghput ulimaneghmeng. ‘We completed building the school.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 167); Mekelghiighem ullghitangi naavegkak ulimaak. ‘The boy fixed his broken wheeled/tracked vehicle.’ (SLI JR. DICT 168)	улима-
ulimaaq	pos	IPA	something made; product; ivory carving	Estugaghmi ulimaaq allaghhiinaq esghaghaqa. ‘At the store I saw various kinds of ivory carvings.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 168)	улимāқ
Ulimaghista	pos	IPA	God; the Creator	"Nuna ulimaneghmeng taaqsamigu, Ulimaghista meghnaalikaq, ulimaani yuvghiiqaa. ‘When He had finished creating the world, God rested, examining His creation.’ (KALLAG. 1)"	Улимаӷиста
ulimanqegsagh-	pos	IPA	to redo; to correct	No information given.	улиманқыхсяӷ-
ulimasiitek	pos	IPA	vice (for holding object being worked on)	Chukotkan (R); this is a dual; the singular would be ulimasiita or ulimasiin	улимасӣтык
ulimasiq	pos	IPA	tool	No information given.	улимасиқ
ulimasta	pos	IPA	maker; sire	No information given.	улимаста
ulimavik	pos	IPA	workshop; factory	No information given.	улимавик
ullegh-	pos	IPA	to fall over	"ulleghtuq ‘it fell over’/ ulleghtaa ‘he made it fall over, knocked it over’; uulqan ‘if it falls over’; uullghaghtuq ‘it suddenly or unexpectedly fell over’"	ульыӷ-
ulleviik	pos	IPA	cage	Chukotkan (R)	ульывӣк
ullevikak	pos	IPA	tin can	Chukotkan (R)	ульывикак
ullghitagh-	pos	IPA	to roll	ullghitaghtuq ‘it rolled’ / ullghitaghtaa ‘he rolled it’; ullghitaghtaghtuq ‘it keeps rolling’	ульҳитаӷ-
ullghitaq	pos	IPA	car; wheeled and/or tracked vehicle; all-terrain vehicle (ATV); snow machine	"used in the dual, ullghitak, for one such vehicle"	ульҳитақ
ullungak	pos	IPA	cheek	"ullungagegka ‘my cheeks’; Kitum qasaghtekangaten ullungagpegun inglungallu tuunaken. ‘If someone slaps you on your cheek, give him the other one too.’ (Matthew 5.39)"	ульюңак
ulluviighraghaqetaq	pos	IPA	square	No information given.	ульювӣӷраӷақытақ
ulluviiq	pos	IPA	square; rectangle; quadrangle; board	No information given.	ульювӣқ
ulluvikaq	pos	IPA	rectangular five-gallon gas can	"may be used in the dual, ulluvikak, for one can; Ulluvikameng egllungllaghtunga. ‘I made a stove out of a five-gallon can.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 45)"	ульювикақ
ulmig-	pos	IPA	turned over; inside out	postural root; ulmigtaa ‘he turned it inside out’; ulmigngaaq ‘it is inside out’	улмиг-
ulmighte-	pos	IPA	to pull back the bowstring preparatory to firing an arrow	Mekelghiighhaam ulmighulluku sikik riigtenganeng nuuneghsighaa. ‘The little boy pulled back the bowstring waiting for the squirrel to peek out of its den.’ (SULUWET 109)	улмиҳты-
ulmigmun	pos	IPA	in the opposite direction	adverbial particle	улмигмун
ulpeg-	pos	IPA	folded back on itself (like a turned up pants leg)	postural root; ulpegtaa ‘he folded it back on itself’; ulpegngaaq ‘it is folded back on itself’	ульпыг-
"ulpegte-, ulpig-"	pos	IPA	to run with all one's might	No information given.	"ульпыхты-, ульпиг-"
ulu	pos	IPA	tongue; language; interpreter; translator	"ulunga ‘his tongue’; Aghnaghaq, taghtughyalghiimi, aleghquullghiit nagasimakangi. Ulu allaghhiinaq. ‘Upon awakening the girl heard people speaking. All different languages.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 69)"	улю
ulug-	pos	IPA	"to soften skin, paper, etc., by flexing it with a circular motion of the hands"	ulugtuq ‘he softened a skin’; ulugaa ‘he softened it’ /	улюг-
"ululaay, ululaayae"	pos	IPA	a certain legendary monster	No information given.	"улюля̄ӥ, улюля̄яы"
"ululiqe-, ululliqe-"	pos	IPA	to be sarcastic; to speak inappropriately	No information given.	"улюлиқы-, улюльиқы-"
ulullugmelnguq*	pos	IPA	one who starts quarrels by his unpleasant use of language; loudmouth	No information given.	улюльюгмылңуқ
ulungaaq1	pos	IPA	uvula	No information given.	улюңāқ1
ulungaaq2	pos	IPA	stone knife	"Chukotkan (R); aghnat uyghagmeng ulaaqelghiit aatghi ulungaaghet ‘the women have stone ulaaq-s, that are called ulungaaq-s’"	улюңāқ2
ulungestaq	pos	IPA	uvula	No information given.	улюңыстақ
ulungigh-	pos	IPA	to become silent; to stop talking	No information given.	улюңиӷ-
ulungite-	pos	IPA	to be silent; to be speechless	No information given.	улюңиты-
uluraaghinagh-	pos	IPA	to communicate orally	No information given.	улюрāӷинаӷ-
uluzik	pos	IPA	tongue of whale	Chukotkan (R)	улюзик
umeg-	pos	IPA	to close; to close door; to shut; for weather to close in	umegtuq ‘it closed’ or ‘the weather closed in’; uumgaa ‘he closed it’ / umegngaaq or uumgumaaq ‘it is closed’	умыг-
umegneq	pos	IPA	blizzard	umegneghughtuq ‘it has become a blizzard; a blizzard has started up’	умыгнық
umegreghaq	pos	IPA	snow flurries	No information given.	умыгрыӷақ
umegte-	pos	IPA	to get stormy	No information given.	умыхты-
umek	pos	IPA	lid; cover; door; stopper	qulmesiitem uumga ‘the pot’s lid’	умык
umek	pos	IPA	box; container for small items	"used in the dual, uumgek, for one container"	умык
Umeyaalek	pos	IPA	Oomeyaluk Bay on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices; = Emeyaalak	Умыя̄лык
umiilek	pos	IPA	leader; boss; captain; king	"Ungazighmiit neghllaget umiilgat – amyuqetalghii , aatgha Qalu. ‘The many households of the people of the Ungazighmiit (Chaplino) had a boss – a tyrant, and his name was Qalu.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 25); … qayughllak neghllakaa Umiilegpagllagem. ‘… because it is the dwelling place of the great King.’ (Matthew 5.35)"	умӣлык
umkughaq	pos	IPA	door	No information given.	умкуӷақ
Umqilir	pos	IPA	Wrangel Island (well northwest of the Yupik area)	see Map 1 in Appendices	Умқилир
umqughaq	pos	IPA	cover; lid	Chukotkan (R)	умқуӷақ
umsighqe-	pos	IPA	to mend; to sew up	Chukotkan (R)	умсиҳқы-
umu-	pos	IPA	"to be thick (of ice, paper, etc.); to sleep dreamily"	cf. ugme-	уму-
umughak	pos	IPA	ice thick enough to walk on	"also used in the dual, umughagek, for ice of this sort; see items 90, 91 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	умуӷак
umughqaa-	pos	IPA	"to experience sleep paralysis (a condition where one feels paralyzed upon wakening or partially wakening); to experience paresthesia (""pins and needles"" feeling in part of the body); to thicken"	umughqaaguq ‘he is experiencing sleep paralysis’ /	умуҳқā-
umukesugnite-	pos	IPA	to be dull; to be slow at learning; clumsy	No information given.	умукысюгниты-
umuqaq	pos	IPA	thick thing	No information given.	умуқақ
umuqun	pos	IPA	lining for garment	Chukotkan (R)	умуқун
umututala	pos	IPA	thickness	sikum umututalanga ‘the thickness of the ice’	умутуталя
umyugaghlliqe-	pos	IPA	to be contrary or difficult in disposition	No information given.	умьюгаҳльиқы-
umyugaghsi-	pos	IPA	to be unauthorized	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	умьюгаҳси-
umyugalek	pos	IPA	one with a good mind; sensible person	No information given.	умьюгалык
umyugange-	pos	IPA	to become mature in mentality	No information given.	умьюгаңы-
umyugaq	pos	IPA	mind	"may be used in the dual, umyugak, for one person’s mind, as in, umyugagka ataasiightagka ‘I made up my mind’"	умьюгақ
umyugaqegtaq	pos	IPA	sensitive person; thoughtful person	No information given.	умьюгақыхтақ
umyugiighute-	pos	IPA	to lose one's mind	No information given.	умьюгӣӷуты-
umyugiite-	pos	IPA	to be insensitive; to be thoughtless	No information given.	умьюгӣты-
Umyugsiq	pos	IPA	Oomyousik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices; cf. umyugaq	Умьюхсиқ
un’gapisiq	pos	IPA	sea-hunting boot	No information given.	унгаписиқ
una	pos	IPA	this one; this one here; this one near the speaker	"base: u-; restricted demonstrative pronoun; see also wha- under its alphabetical listing; relative singular pronoun: uum or ukum ‘(of) this’; absolutive/relative plural: ukut ‘these’; vocative: uyuq ‘you, here’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: taana ‘that’; plural: taakut ‘those’; localis adverb: whani ‘here’; terminalis adverb: whavek ‘to here’; vialis adverb: whagun ‘through here’; ablative adverb: whaken ‘from here’; interjectional: whaa ‘right here!’; anaphoric localis adverb: tawani ‘there’"	уна
una-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > unake-, unange-"	уна-
unaami	pos	IPA	tomorrow; the next day	"adverbial particle: esghaghlleqamken unaami ‘I’ll see you tomorrow’; can take a limited range of inflection: Nulqaviighutkegpenaan unaamilleghqaq, qayughllak unaamim seghleliighi itagnaghyaghqaagut tawavek aghneghmun. ‘Don’t worry [today] about what will happen tomorrow, because tomorrow’s troubles are enough for that day.’ (Matthew 6.34)"	унāми
unaangu-	pos	IPA	to be morning	"most often used in the subordinative with 3rd person singular object transitive ending: unaanguluku ‘when it was morning’; unaangupiglluku ‘when it was early morning’; Unaanguluku aanluni, uteghnightuq ighivgaamaan. ‘After having gone out when it was morning, he returned when evening had come.’ (AANGHHAQ 38)"	унāңу-
unaaq	pos	IPA	morning	as a particle: ‘this morning’; unaalqusiq ‘all morning’	унāқ
unaaqusite-	pos	IPA	to postpone until morning	unaaqusituq ‘he postponed acting until the next morning’; unaaqusitaa ‘he postponed it until the next morning’ /	унāқуситы-
unaaqutaq	pos	IPA	breakfast	Chukotkan (R)	унāқутақ
unaaqute-	pos	IPA	for morning to come	unaaqunneghagu ‘every morning’	унақуты-
unaayagh-	pos	IPA	to go out early in the morning	No information given.	унāяӷ-
unaayaq	pos	IPA	morning flight of birds	No information given.	унāяқ
unaghsiighwaq	pos	IPA	wooden stick	No information given.	унаҳсӣӷӱақ
unaghsiq	pos	IPA	"wood for making something (that is, wood which is not firewood)"	No information given.	унаҳсиқ
unake-	pos	IPA	"to catch by hunting; to hit (with bullet, spear, etc.)"	"unakaa ‘he caught it, he hit it’ /"	унакы-
unakegkaq	pos	IPA	something caught	No information given.	унакыхкақ
unange-	pos	IPA	to catch game (especially seal)	unanguq ‘he caught a seal’ /	унаңы-
unangkaq	pos	IPA	seal that has been caught	No information given.	унаңкақ
unangniigh-	pos	IPA	to hunt; to hunt seals	"unangniightuq ‘he is hunting (seals)’ / Taagken unangniighet naapsimaat læv, naapluku petugaat tapghaghpagneng uqvigmun. ‘Then some hunters caught the lion (læv), and when they caught him, they tied him up with a strong rope to a tree.’ (YUP. ULUNG. 2:123)"	унаңнӣӷ-
unangniighta	pos	IPA	hunter	No information given.	унаңнӣҳта
unangniighusiq	pos	IPA	weapon for hunting seals	No information given.	унаңнӣӷусиқ
unangsagh-	pos	IPA	to catch lots of seals	No information given.	унаңсяӷ-
unangseghwaaghun	pos	IPA	gun or other device for catching game	Chukotkan (R)	унаңсыӷӱāӷун
unatagh-	pos	IPA	to pick greens	unataghtuq ‘he picked greens’; unataghii ‘he picked them’ /	унатаӷ-
unataghyaghqaq	pos	IPA	wild edible plant	No information given.	унатаӷьяҳқақ
unataq	pos	IPA	alaska carrot (Hedysarum hedysaroides or Geum Rossii)	No information given.	унатақ
unaymigh-	pos	IPA	to feel capable of acting	unaymightuq ‘he feels capable’; unaymighaa ‘he feels he can act on it’ /	унаӥмиӷ-
uneghmig-	pos	IPA	to put under one's arm; to carry or clutch under one's arm	uneghmigaa ‘he has it clutched under his arm’ /	уныӷмиг-
uneghrugtaq	pos	IPA	bag or purse with shoulder strap which is carried hanging down under one's arm; amulet worn over the shoulder	No information given.	уныӷрухтақ
unegna	pos	IPA	that one down there; that one out on the sea	"base: un'g-; extended demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: un'gum ‘(of) the one down there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: unegkut ‘those down there’; vocative: unegyuq ‘you, down there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: taanegna ‘that one down there’; localis adverb: un'gani ‘down there’; terminalis adverb: un'gavek ‘to down there’; vialis adverb: uun'ggun ‘through down there’; ablative adverb: unegken ‘from down there’; interjectional: un'ga ‘there (down there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: taan'gani ‘there, down there’"	уныгна
unegte-	pos	IPA	to stay behind; to leave or be left behind	"unegtuq ‘he stayed behind’, ‘he was left behind’; unegtaa ‘he left it or her behind’ / unegtaq or unegtekaq ‘something left behind’"	уныхты-
unegtuusaq	pos	IPA	something left for others	#NAME?	уныхтӯсяқ
unegyuuq	pos	IPA	clam-type shellfish	exact identification undetermined	уныгью̄қ
uneq	pos	IPA	armpit; underarm; area between arm and body	No information given.	унық
ungagaq	pos	IPA	lichen; reindeer moss	No information given.	уңагақ
ungagigh-	pos	IPA	to shave	No information given.	уңагиӷ-
ungak	pos	IPA	whisker; beard hair; mustache hair	No information given.	уңак
ungasqi-	pos	IPA	to be capricious without enjoyment	"Chukotkan (R,V&E)"	уңасқи-
ungavik	pos	IPA	small square tent-like sleeping enclosure inside the mangteghapik (q.v.)	"Ungaviguut amit ighivganghani nekeglluki qavaatkayugni, nanilighluki. ‘There were small square tent-like enclosures that could be closed off  that they set up in the evening where they could sleep, and they provided them with lamps.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 1:82) "	уңавик
ungavisqwaaq	pos	IPA	snowflake	No information given.	уңависқӱāқ
Ungazighmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan; people from Ungaziq	No information given.	Уңазиӷмӣ(т)
Ungaziq	pos	IPA	Chaplino (specifically Old Chaplino) in Chukotka; Indian Point; Chukotka or Siberia in general	"see Map 2 in Appendices; the name Ungaziq specifically refers to Old Chaplino at Cape Chaplina, but is now also the Yupik name for New Chaplino inside Tkachen Bay which was originally called Tasiq, apparently because the population and administrative apparatus ot Old Chaplino has been moved there; sometimes  this word is used for Yupik-inhabited Chukotka in general"	Уңазиқ
ungelegte-	pos	IPA	to shake; to tremble	ungelegtuq ‘he is shaking’ / ungelegtestaa ‘it made him to shake’	уңылыхты-
ungigh-	pos	IPA	to soften	Chukotan (V&E)	уңиӷ-
ungiighte-	pos	IPA	to become covered with whiskers	No information given.	уңӣҳты-
ungilag-	pos	IPA	to itch	ungilagtuq ‘it itches’ /	уңиляг-
ungilagnaq	pos	IPA	something that causes itching	No information given.	уңилягнақ
ungilagsaghagh-	pos	IPA	to cause to itch	ungilagsaghaghaa ‘it is making him itch’ /	уңиляхсяӷаӷ-
ungilagyaq	pos	IPA	sea sponge	exact identification undetermined	уңилягьяқ
ungipaate-	pos	IPA	to tell	ungipaataa ‘he told him’ / ungipaataanga kaalleqniluki unaami ‘he told me that they would come tomorrow’	уңипāты-
ungipagh-	pos	IPA	to spread news; to inform	No information given.	уңипаӷ-
ungipaghaan	pos	IPA	traditional story; tale; legend	"also ungipaghaata; often with animal or mythological characters; Ayumiim Ungipaghaatangi ‘Tales of Long Ago’ (title of a certain series of books, Kaneshiro 1972, 1975a, 1975b, 1975c)"	уңипаӷāт
ungipaghagh-	pos	IPA	to tell a traditional story	"ungipaghaghtuq ‘he is telling a traditional story’ / ungipaghaatii ‘he is telling them a traditional story’; Ungipaghaghlanga ‘Let Me Tell a Story’ (title of a certain book, Koonooka 2003)"	уңипаӷаӷ-
ungipaghaq	pos	IPA	story (traditional); tale; legend	No information given.	уңипаӷақ
ungipaghqe-	pos	IPA	for an unfortunate event to occur	Chukotkan (V&E)	уңипаҳқы-
ungipaghsugh-	pos	IPA	to ask for news or other information	No information given.	уңипаҳсюӷ-
ungipamsug-	pos	IPA	to relate; to tell	No information given.	уңипамсюг-
ungipamsuk	pos	IPA	narrative; account; history	No information given.	уңипамсюк
ungipange-	pos	IPA	to hear news	No information given.	уңипаңы-
ungipaq	pos	IPA	news; information	No information given.	уңипақ
ungipaqfigite- 	pos	IPA	to be something that one cannot discuss	No information given.	уңипақфигаты-
ungipite-	pos	IPA	to tell	ungipitaa ‘he told him’ /	уңипиты-
Ungiramket	pos	IPA	former village between Cape Chaplina and Cape Mertensa in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Уңирамкыт
unglegh-	pos	IPA	"to nestle down in a ball (of dogs, wolves, etc.); to bed down (of an animal)"	ungleghtuq ‘it nestled down’; kaviighem ungleghallgha ‘place where a fox bedded down’; cf. unglun	уңлыӷ-
ungllaghutaq	pos	IPA	"trimming on hood, hat or sleeve"	Chukotkan (R)	уңльяӷутақ
unglleg-	pos	IPA	to gather or draw together with folds or pleats; to wrinkle with age; to withdraw from activity; to shrink	"ungllegtuq ‘he or it got wrinkled’ / ungllegtaa ‘he wrinkled it, gathered it (cloth), etc.’"	уңльыг-
ungllevregagh-	pos	IPA	to wrinkle; to curl	No information given.	уңльыврыгаӷ-
unglun	pos	IPA	nest of bird	unglutnga or unglutanga ‘its nest’	уңлюн
ungughte-	pos	IPA	to take back; to pull back	"ungughtaa ‘he took her back’, ‘he pulled it back’"	уңуҳты-
unguva-	pos	IPA	to be alive	unguvaaq ‘it is alive’ /	уңува-
unguvagh-	pos	IPA	to come to life	"unguvaghtuq ‘it came to life, revived’ / unguvaghtaa ‘he revived it’"	уңуваӷ-
unguvalleq	pos	IPA	life	No information given.	уңувальық
"unguvayute-, unguvavyiigh-"	pos	IPA	to be barely alive	No information given.	"уңуваюты-, уңувавӥӣӷ-"
Unguvigaq	pos	IPA	Ongoveyuk River and Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Уңувигақ
ungyaq	pos	IPA	thin fluff on body; underhair	Chukotkan (R)	уңьяқ
ungyugte-	pos	IPA	to drive game in order to hunt it	Chukotkan	уңьюхты-
uniigh-	pos	IPA	to become limp; to lose muscle control; to become paralyzed	uniightuq or uniighaa ‘he lost muscle control’ / uniighumaaq ‘he is paralyzed’	унӣӷ-
uniighyug-	pos	IPA	to feel hurt emotionally; to feel offended	No information given.	унӣӷьюг-
uniilliighaghte-	pos	IPA	to soften; to make pliable	No information given.	унӣльӣӷаҳты-
uniistaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	soft thing	uniistaaghhaaguq ‘it is soft’	унӣстāҳақ
unite-	pos	IPA	to leave behind	unitaa ‘he left it behind’ / unitiiq ‘he left something behind’	униты-
unkusae	pos	IPA	steel trap for animals; braining trap activated by twisted sinew cord under tension	"also dual, unkusek, for one trap; = utkusa"	ункусяы
unkuseke-	pos	IPA	to catch with trap; to trap (it)	unkesekaa ‘he trapped it’ /	ункусыкы-
unkuselighi-	pos	IPA	to set traps	unkuselighiiq ‘he is setting traps’ /	ункусылиӷи-
unkuseniigh-	pos	IPA	to go trapping	No information given.	ункусынӣӷ-
unkusequ-	pos	IPA	to check traps	No information given.	ункусықу-
unkuvagaghaq	pos	IPA	long thick rope made from skin of young walrus	Chukotkan (R)	ункувагаӷақ
unkuvak	pos	IPA	yearling walrus	unkuvalek ‘walrus cow with yearling’	ункувак
Unlluk	pos	IPA	site located to the west of Lake Nayvak (the lagoon with old Chaplino at its eastern corner) in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Унльюк
unug-	pos	IPA	for it to become night	"unugtuq ‘it became night, night fell’; unugaa ‘night came upon him’ / ununeghsighaqa ‘I'm waiting for night’; tawantuq unugtaallghanun kenlanga ‘he stayed there until very late at night’"	унуг-
unugaghllag-	pos	IPA	to act or occur very early in the morning	No information given.	унугаҳльяг-
unuggiinaq	pos	IPA	a single night	No information given.	унухӣнақ
unuk	pos	IPA	night; last night	unuwaa? ‘is it night?’; unuk as a particle: ‘last night’	унук
unukun	pos	IPA	tonight; when night comes; during the coming night	adverbial particle	унукун
"unungllaan, unugnaan, unugsaan"	pos	IPA	gnat; midge	No information given.	"унуңлья̄н, унугнāн, унухся̄н"
unusengetaq	pos	IPA	twilight; short spring or summer night	No information given.	унусыңытақ
upag-	pos	IPA	to go down to boat or out to ship to see or help those arriving	upagtuq ‘he went down to a boat’; upagaa ‘he went down to help her’ /	упаг-
upelen	pos	IPA	deliberately; this way; not the other way; purposely	Chukotkan; particle	упылын
upenghaghaq*	pos	IPA	early spring	No information given.	упынӷаӷақ
upenghaq	pos	IPA	spring (season); last spring	"as a particle, ‘last spring’"	упынӷақ
"upenghaqun, upenghaqu"	pos	IPA	next spring	particle	"упынӷақун, упынӷақу"
upenghiighte-	pos	IPA	"to do something, or to stay, all through the spring"	No information given.	упынӷӣҳты-
upleg-	pos	IPA	to rush over to	uplegtuq (or uplegiiq) ‘he rushed over to someone or something’; uplegaa ‘he rushed over to it or her’ /	упльыг-
upugh-	pos	IPA	to get startled; to quaver	upughtuq ‘he got startled’ / upughtaa ‘he startled him’; upuutkaa ‘he got startled by it’; Upughpenanga pugimameng aghvightunga inglunganun. ‘Without quavering I crossed over swimming to the other side of it.’ (AANGHHAQ 39)	упуӷ-
upugha-	pos	IPA	to be hospitable	upughaaq ‘he is hospitable’ / upughataa ‘he is being hospitable to her’; upughaneq ‘a hospitable person’; upughanghilnguq ‘an inhospitable person’	упуӷа-
upupeng	pos	IPA	might as well	"particle; meghnughllaguunga, upupeng wiin taaqaghhnaqunga qepghaneghmeng ‘I'm very tired, I might as well quit for a while’; Maantekumtung tuqulleqiinkung. Upupeng qayangllaghlutung aghulaqeltung. ‘If we stay here, they will kill us, we might as well make a kayak and leave.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 35)"	упупың
Uqaghlliit	pos	IPA	the people of Sireniki in Chukotka	this is a plural; Uqaghllistun ‘in the language of the people of Sireniki’; = Uqeghlliit; see also Sighinek	Уқаҳльӣт
uqalitaq	pos	IPA	hanging swing	"Chukotkan (V&E); used in the plural, uqalitat, for one such swing"	уқалитақ
Uqeghlliit	pos	IPA	the people of Sireniki in Chukotka	this is a plural; Uqeghllistun ‘in the language of the people of Sireniki’; = Uqaghlliit; see also Sighinek	Уқыҳльӣт
uqenge-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > uqengeghte-, uqengeghyuugte-, uqengelli-, uqengelliqe-; cf. uqik"	уқыңы-
uqengeghte-	pos	IPA	to be lighter in weight; to feel better after sickness; for weather to improve	"uqengeghtuq ‘it got lighter, he feels better, the weather improved’; uqengeghtaa ‘he made it tidier’ /"	уқыңыҳты-
uqengeghyuugte-	pos	IPA	to feel much better	No information given.	уқыңыӷью̄хты-
uqengelli-	pos	IPA	to become or make lighter in weight	No information given.	уқыңыльи-
uqengelliqe-	pos	IPA	to feel free and easy	No information given.	уқыңыльиқы-
uqengestaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	lightweight thing	uqengestaaghhaaguq ‘it is light in weight’	уқыңыстāҳақ
uqengestaaq	pos	IPA	lightweight thing	uqengestaaghhaaguq ‘it is light in weight’	уқыңыстāқ
uqeq	pos	IPA	lee side; south side	uuqghani ‘on its lee side’; cf. uughqa	уқық
uqfigaq	pos	IPA	edible roots of diamond willow (Salix pulchra) or the willow shrub itself	No information given.	уқфигақ
uqfik	pos	IPA	tree	No information given.	уқфик
uqfillegaq	pos	IPA	shrub; bush	No information given.	уқфильыгақ
uqfillgaaq	pos	IPA	twig(s)	No information given.	уқфильхāқ
uqigh-	pos	IPA	to put oil in (it); get (lots of) oil	"uqightuq ‘he got (lots of) oil’; uqighaa ‘he put oil in it’ /  Waranwha  avaqutaghhaghten neghellequt, ama uqighllequkut. ‘At least your little children will eat and we’ll get lots of oil.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 25)"	уқиӷ-
uqigite-	pos	IPA	to be light in weight	uqigituq ‘it is light’ /	уқигиты-
uqigkutaq	pos	IPA	weight (heavy object); ballast	No information given.	уқихкутақ
uqigtu-	pos	IPA	to be heavy	uqigtuuq ‘it is heavy’ /	уқихту-
uqigtughte-	pos	IPA	to increase in weight; to become heavier	No information given.	уқихтуҳты-
uqigtutala	pos	IPA	weight (of something	uqigtutalanga ‘its weight’	уқихтуталя
uqiigh-	pos	IPA	to remove oil or blubber	uqiighaa neghsaq ‘he took the blubber off the seal’	уқӣӷ-
uqiineq	pos	IPA	lee side; windless area	No information given.	уқӣнық
uqiiq	pos	IPA	leeward direction	Chukotkan (R)	уқӣқ
uqiitagh-	pos	IPA	to stay out of the wind	No information given.	уқӣтаӷ-
uqiite-	pos	IPA	to take shelter from the wind	uqiituq ‘he took shelter ‘/ uqiitfikaa ‘he took shelter in it’	уқӣты-
uqik	pos	IPA	weight (as an abstract quality)	No information given.	уқик
Uqikak	pos	IPA	Okikak Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 6 in Appendices	Уқикак
uqingllagh-	pos	IPA	to make oil from blubber	No information given.	уқиңльяӷ-
uqligh-	pos	IPA	to watch for game (or for a person)	uqlightuq ‘he is watching for game’ /	уқльиӷ-
uqliite-	pos	IPA	to aim at; to threaten 	uqliitaa ‘he is aiming at it’ /	уқльӣты-
uqlughneq	pos	IPA	drop of liquid	No information given.	уқльуӷнық
uqlughqagh-	pos	IPA	to keep dripping	No information given.	уқльюҳқаӷ-
uqlughseketaq	pos	IPA	drip catcher	No information given.	уқльюҳсыкытақ
uqlughte-	pos	IPA	to drip	uqlughtuq ‘it is dripping’; uqlughtaa ‘it is dripping on it’ /	уқльюҳты-
uqlumrek	pos	IPA	oyster	exact identification undetermined	уқльюмрык
"uqug-, uqugte-"	pos	IPA	to get moldy	uqugtuq or uqugaa or uqugtaa ‘it got moldy’ /	"уқуг-, уқухты-"
uqughate-	pos	IPA	to taste oily or greasy	uqughalnguq ‘oily food’	уқуӷаты-
uqughqaq	pos	IPA	lamp oil; fuel oil	No information given.	уқуҳқақ
uqughqu	pos	IPA	oily or inner side of a dried walrus skin	uqughqunga tanpeghhem taakluku kinengllaghaquq ‘the oily (inner) part of the walrus skin will (put up to) be dried longer’	уқуҳқу
uqughte-	pos	IPA	"to apply oil to; to add oil to; to make a dish of berries, reindeer fat, water and sugar"	No information given.	уқуҳты-
uqughtekaq	pos	IPA	"dish of salmonberries, seal oil, shortening or lard, and sugar; Eskimo “ice cream”"	No information given.	уқуҳтыкақ
uqugpagnite-	pos	IPA	to smell moldy	uqugpagnituq ‘it smells moldy’ /	уқухпагниты-
uquk	pos	IPA	mold	No information given.	уқук
uqulghutaq	pos	IPA	tank for gasoline or oil	"also used in the dual, uqulghutak, for one gas tank"	уқулӷутақ
uqumigta	pos	IPA	flock of birds heading south in evening	No information given.	уқумихта
uqumraak	pos	IPA	little bit of fat	No information given.	уқумрāк
uqumyak	pos	IPA	tree pitch	No information given.	уқумьяк
uquq	pos	IPA	blubber; oil; seal oil; fat	"uqaa ‘its oil’; Sivuyagtenginaat gaaqayuguftut aghveghem uqaaneng. ‘The strikers were the only ones who rendered the whale blubber.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:122); Nayugluki, amiirii yugusiineng iiknemteki uusluki uqiighaqaput.’After we skin them (the seals) without splitting the skin, remove the skins from the carcasses and turn them inside out, we remove the fat from them.’ (MRS. DELLA W. 34)"	уқуқ
uquughralek	pos	IPA	one with inner side (of hide)	Chukotkan (R); exact meaning undetermined	уқӯӷралык
Uquuk	pos	IPA	Okok R. and its mouth on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Уқӯк
uraka	pos	IPA	"transverse pieces on the sled, support for runner"	Chukotkan (R)	урака
uramra 	pos	IPA	while awake	particle; qavaalungallu esghaamazikun nalighmeng uramra ‘did I see it in my sleep or was it real’	урамра
urang	pos	IPA	very much	adverbial particle	ураң
uremte-	pos	IPA	to joke; to kid; to tease	Chukotkan; uremtaa ‘he is kidding him’ / = waamte-	урымты-
usi	pos	IPA	load	usinga ‘its load’	уси
usiista	pos	IPA	freighter (ship)	No information given.	усӣста
usiligh-	pos	IPA	to load	usilighaa ‘he loaded it’	усилиӷ-
usingigh-	pos	IPA	to unload	usingighaa ‘he unloaded it’	усиңиӷ-
uskaaq	pos	IPA	cord used with seal retrieving hook; cord of a sling	No information given.	ускāқ
uskughapik	pos	IPA	twine used for summer sculpin fishing	No information given.	ускуӷапик
uskughaq	pos	IPA	fishing line; cord; twine	No information given.	ускуӷақ
uskungnaqun	pos	IPA	incantation for safety when hunting by boat	Chukotkan (R)	ускуңнатун
uspeqe-	pos	IPA	to estimate	"uspeqaa ‘he estimated its size, weight, etc.’ / uspequtuq ‘he made an estimate’; cf. usputagh-"	успықы-
uspequte-	pos	IPA	to show how	uspequtaa ‘he showed him how’ /	успықуты-
uspusiqe-	pos	IPA	to adapt to	Chukotkan (R)	успусиқы-
usputagh-	pos	IPA	to measure	cf. uspeqe-; Nanuum amiraan angtalanga usputaghaqa. ‘I measured the size of the polar bear skin.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 28)	успутаӷ-
usputaq	pos	IPA	ruler (measuring device)	No information given.	успутақ
uspute-	pos	IPA	to measure; to compare	usputuq ‘he measured himself’; usputaa ‘he measured it’ / cf. uspeqe-	успуты-
usugh-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"(root) > usuqe-, usughyug-"	усюӷ-
usughyug-	pos	IPA	to be impressed	usughyugtuq ‘he is impressed’ / = usuqsug-; cf. usuqe-	усюӷюг-
usugtaq	pos	IPA	tenon of skin boat frame member or sled frame member	No information given.	усюхтақ
usuk	pos	IPA	penis	nowadays only animal penis; see uupa for human penis	усюк
usuqe-	pos	IPA	to praise	usuquq ‘he praised himself to others’; usuqaa ‘he praised her’ / cf. usughyug-	усюқы-
usuqesage-	pos	IPA	to be ostentatious; to be showy	No information given.	усюқысягы-
usuqnagh- 	pos	IPA	to be impressive	No information given.	усюқньаӷ-
usuqsug-	pos	IPA	to be impressed	usuqsugtuq ‘he is impressed’ / = usughyug-	усюқсюг-
usuqsuke-	pos	IPA	to be impressed with	usuqsukaa ‘he is impressed with him’ / 	усюқсюқы-
utaqa-	pos	IPA	to wait for	utaqaa ‘he is waiting for her’ / utaqiiguq ‘he is waiting’; utaqalleqamken ‘I shall wait for you’; utaqanga ‘wait for me’	утақа-
utaqalgigh-	pos	IPA	to wait (for)	Legan ulmighulluku ughluveni utaqalgighaa mekelghiighem. ‘The boy just drew back his bow and waited for it.’ (SULUWET 101)	утақалгиӷ-
uteghmigagh-	pos	IPA	to multiply (mathematically)	Chukotkan	утыӷмигаӷ-
uteghmun	pos	IPA	homeward; backward; returning; on the contrary	adverbial particle; uteghmun tagikuvek ‘when you return’	утыӷмун
uteghnigh-	pos	IPA	to return from a trip	uteghnightuq ‘he returned’ /	утыӷниӷ-
uteghpaarkitaagh-	pos	IPA	to pace back and forth	No information given.	утыҳпāркитāӷ-
uteghpaghte-	pos	IPA	to return quickly	No information given.	утыҳпаҳты-
uteghpagtagh-	pos	IPA	to go back and forth; to do over again	No information given.	утыҳпахтаӷ-
uteghte-	pos	IPA	to come back; to turn back; to return; to change plans	"uteghtuq ‘he came back, changed plans’ / uutghutaa ‘he brought it back, changed his mind about it’"	утыҳты-
uteghvagh-	pos	IPA	to step or pull back; to go further into the house	"uteghvaghtuq ‘he stepped back, he went further in’; uteghvaghaa ‘he pulled it back, he took it further in’ /"	утыӷваӷ-
utkusae	pos	IPA	steel trap for animals; braining trap activated by twisted sinew cord under tension	Chukotkan; = unkusa	уткусяы
Utngusighnaq	pos	IPA	Olngooseenuk Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Утңьусиӷнақ
utumek	pos	IPA	earth; clay; soil.	No information given.	утумык
utuqa	pos	IPA	old thing; aged thing	No information given.	утуқа
utuqaluk	pos	IPA	very old thing	No information given.	утуқалюк
Utuqsit	pos	IPA	area of large rocks on the mountain behind Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Утуқсит
uugg	pos	IPA	No information given.	particle; used with reference to something dirty	ӯх
uughhae	pos	IPA	porcelain	No information given.	ӯҳаы
uughhe-1	pos	IPA	to get gooey; to be dirtied	uughhuq or uughhaa ‘it got gooey’ /	ӯҳы-1
uughhe-2	pos	IPA	to drift away with the current	uughhuq or uughhaa ‘it drifted away’ / Angwaaghun aga uughhaa. ‘The oar drifted away.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 172)	ӯҳы-2
uughhun	pos	IPA	"first pieces of sea ice moving toward shore in winter, preceding a large field of ice moving in; ice cake blown off from main ice"	"also used in the dual, uughhutek, for this type of ice; see item 92 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	ӯҳун
uughqa	pos	IPA	south side; lee side; the south	"uughqa 'south'; when inflecting, this word acts as a 3s-s possessed form, and has relative case n, and localis, terminalis and ablative modalis in n (rather than m): Unaami ukavek uughqan tunganganun eslughllequnga. 'Tomorrow I will down there in the direction of the south.' (UNGIPAGHAGH. 162); uughqanun 'to the south'; uughqani 'in the south'; (see also aywaa, kellii, and kilgaa); but note, uughqangani ‘on its south side’; cf. uqeq"	ӯҳқа
uughqaghtaq	pos	IPA	swamping wave; sea swell	uughqaghtaghllak ‘big sea swell’; Atghaghaqsaghluta qukaghinnemta uughqaghtaghllaget kaannemteki uteghtaqluta. ‘As we were going back we ran into big sea swells in the middle [of the passage] and we would have to turn back [several times].’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:108)	ӯҳқаҳтақ
uughqaghte-	pos	IPA	to suddenly get up onto something	No information given.	ӯҳқаҳты-
uughqu	pos	IPA	spotted seal (Phoca largha)	Chukotkan	ӯҳқу
uughquvak	pos	IPA	large spotted seal (Phoca largha)	No information given.	ӯҳқувак
uughqwaaq	pos	IPA	adult spotted seal (Phoca largha)	No information given.	ӯҳқӱāқ
uughtugh-	pos	IPA	to wash one’s hands	cf. ughvugh-	ӯҳтуӷ-
uughyu	pos	IPA	a type of sea squirt said to taste somewhat like tobacco	exact identification undetermined	ӯӷью
uugka	pos	IPA	east	Chukotkan (R); for uughqa ?	ӯхка
uugllegagh-	pos	IPA	to come up in a group	No information given.	ӯхльыгаӷ-
uugna	pos	IPA	that one toward the exit from inside; that one toward the west; that one toward the northwest; that one down toward the exit in terms of topography; Gambell from Savoonga	"base: ug-; restricted demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: ugum ‘(of) the one down there’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: uugkut ‘those down there’; vocative: uugyuq ‘you, down there’; uugkughsi ‘you (pl) down there’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: taawna ‘that one down there’; localis adverb: ugani ‘down there’; terminalis adverb: ugavek ‘to down there’; vialis adverb: uuggun ‘through down there’; ablative adverb: uugken ‘from down there’; interjectional: uga ‘there (down there)!’; anaphoric localis adverb: taawani ‘there, down there’"	ӯгна
uugsilghaq	pos	IPA	walrus lying on ice; sea mammals at breeding grounds	"Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, uugsilghat, for sea mammals at breeding grounds"	ӯхсилӷақ
Uugsilghet	pos	IPA	site in Niyrakpak Lagoon on St. Lawrence Is. where small seals come up on shore	see Map 4 in Appendices; probably essentially the same word as uugsilghat ‘sea mammals’ hauling out ground’	ӯхсилӷыт
Uugsit	pos	IPA	Aghsit Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Ӯхсит
uugta	pos	IPA	sea mammal resting on land or ice	No information given.	ӯхта
uugtaghaq	pos	IPA	bird sitting on land or ice	Chukotkan (R)	ӯхтаӷақ
uugte-	pos	IPA	to get up onto something	uugtuq ‘it got up onto something’; uugtaa ‘it got up onto it’ /	ӯхты-
uuhuk	pos	IPA	go!; start!	exclamatory particle; = guhuk; the initial long vowel is often lengthened even further	ӯьук
uuhuuk	pos	IPA	No information given.	exclamatory particle said when one is about to lift a heavy object	ӯьӯк
uuk	pos	IPA	oops!; watch out!; oh dear!	particle; = huk; uukaku	ӯк
uukaq	pos	IPA	codfish	"general term, but may also refer to a particular species (exact identification undetermined); sometimes called “Arctic cod”, though the actual fish with this name, the Gadus morhua, is not found in the area"	ӯкақ
uukna	pos	IPA	that one approaching; that one near here	"base: uk-; demonstrative pronoun; relative singular pronoun: ukum ‘(of) the one approaching’; absolutive/relative plural pronoun: ukegkut ‘those approaching’; vocative: uuksuq ‘you, approaching’; anaphoric abs. sing. pronoun: taakwna ‘that one approaching’; localis adverb: ukani ‘near here’; terminalis adverb: ukavek ‘to nearby’; vialis adverb: ukagun ‘through nearby’; ablative adverb: ukegken ‘from nearby’; interjectional: uka ‘here, nearby, coming this way!’; anaphoric localis adverb: taakwani ‘there, near hear’"	ӯкньа
uuknaliqe-	pos	IPA	to prophecy	"… nengyumta ungipamsuga Iteghyaghaam taana mangteghasqughhaq, kuugghan uuknaliqaqngami nekeftekaqeftaa church-enguluku. ‘… our grandmother had talked about how Iteghyaghaq, her brother, because he had prophecied, had set up that little house to be a church.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3.66); Tawaten pilleghqun uuknaliqistem Jeremiah-am uuknaliqellgha apeghiiqaq …. ‘In that way the prophet Jeremiah’s prophecy came to pass ….’ (Matthew 2.17)"	ӯкньалиқы-
uuknaliqista	pos	IPA	prophet	"used in Bible translation; Ilangit pikat, “Uuknaliqistenguuq, neghighluku uuknaliqistestun ayuquq.” ‘Some of them said, “He is a prophet, he is like the prophets of old.”’ (Mark 6.15) "	ӯкньалиқиста
Uuleq	pos	IPA	Uelen (well north of the (Central Siberian) Yupik area)	see Map 1 in Appendices	Ӯлық
uullghiitaq	pos	IPA	brace	No information given.	ӯльҳӣтақ
uullghuk	pos	IPA	hot-springs	Chukotkan	ӯльҳук
uulmun	pos	IPA	backward; toward the rear	particle; cf. uteghte-	ӯлмун
uulqaghtekaq*	pos	IPA	men’s summer sealskin short boot	Chukotkan (R)	ӯльқаҳтыкақ
uulqiq	pos	IPA	"wild ""potato""; claytonia (spring beauty) (Clatonia tuberosa Pall); domestic or store-bought potato"	No information given.	ӯльқиқ
uulsugnaq	pos	IPA	"ice block that is unstable, can easily roll over if stepped on"	see item 93 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ӯльсюгнақ
uulte-	pos	IPA	to turn inside-out; to gossip about; to bad-mouth; to change one's character when becoming mature	"uultuq ‘it turned inside out’; uultaa ‘he turned it inside out, bad-mouthed him’ / uulqaghtuq ‘it suddenly turned inside-out’"	ӯльты-
uultekaq	pos	IPA	hair-in sealskin boot	No information given.	ӯльтыкақ
uultelleq	pos	IPA	rolled-over chunk of ice	see item 94 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ӯльтыльық
uumgaq	pos	IPA	box; container for small items	"used in the dual, uumgak, for one container"	ӯмгақ
uumtaq	pos	IPA	storage area under sleeping area of a semi-subterranean house (nenglu); cellar	No information given.	ӯмтақ
uun'gutaq	pos	IPA	something left for others	#NAME?	ӯнгутақ
uunghaghsi-	pos	IPA	to aim harpoon	No information given.	ӯнӷаҳси-
uunghaq*	pos	IPA	harpoon; ice probe or tester	No information given.	ӯнӷақ
uunghiitaq	pos	IPA	food prepared and consumed in conjunction with the dedication of a harpoon; festive delicacy	… uunghiitaq seghleghllagunaquq ighivgaghmi whani. ‘The festive delicacies are going to be quite plentiful this evening.’ (SULUWET 88)	ӯнӷӣтақ
uunghun	pos	IPA	amulet for protection	Chukotkan (R)	ӯнӷун
uunmek	pos	IPA	including; and also	"conjunctive particle; laalighfikaghtaqsaqumegteggu aghnaq ilangan, uunmek uyughaan the woman's relatives should come to visit her, especially her sister; talwa kiigmi whani inghuyaqaghpenaamta, uunmek elpek inghuyaghyuneghtuqaten we didn't even go berry picking this summer, not even you who likes to go berry picking"	ӯнмык
uupa	pos	IPA	“sea peach” (Halocynthia aurantia); penis (human)	uupat ‘sea peaches’	ӯпа
uupte-	pos	IPA	to burst out crying	uuptuq ‘he burst out crying’ / uuptutkaa ‘he burst out crying about it’	ӯпты-
uusae	pos	IPA	hose	#NAME?	ӯсяы
uusleq	pos	IPA	pressure ridge; piled-up ice; ice jam	see item 97 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004; = vuusleq	ӯсльық
uusneghwaaq	pos	IPA	small hill	Tawavek uusneghwaaghem qaaynganun mayughyalghiimi saama esghaghii maalghuk mengteghaak. ‘When he got up on top of the small hill he saw two houses.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 69)	ӯсньыӷӱāқ
uusneq	pos	IPA	river or ocean bank; small hill	uusneghem qaaygnanun mayughlunga aruughlunga yuuk piyuk esghaghluku ullghitakun paayghaqa ‘I went up to the top of the bank to look around and saw a man on foot and then went to meet him by vehicle’	ӯсньық
uusqaayak	pos	IPA	ice coming into view on the horizon; elevated part of sea ice	see item 95 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004	ӯсқāяк
uusqagh-	pos	IPA	to be deep; to be high	uusqaghtuq ‘it is high’ / uusqapigtuq ‘it is very high’	ӯсқаӷ-
uusqaq	pos	IPA	deep place; high place	No information given.	ӯсқақ
uusqite-	pos	IPA	to reach a deep area	No information given.	ӯсқиты-
uutghumigtagh-	pos	IPA	to repeat over and over	No information given.	ӯтҳумихтаӷ-
uutghute-	pos	IPA	to return (it)	uutghutaa ‘he returned it’ /	ӯтҳуты-
uutqiigh-	pos	IPA	to move back or backward	No information given.	ӯтқӣӷ-
uuvganeng	pos	IPA	the same from the beginning; always (with reference to the past)	adverbial particle; uuvganeng ima liisimakegkaqaghput natekeruugngalleq ‘from the beginning we knew that something was wrong’; uuvganeng ima aghnaghaghhaaluni ineqsunaghtuq ‘she has been very pretty since she was a little girl’; uuvganeng aghnaq kakiyuuq ‘the woman has always been a good sewer’	ӯвганың
Uuyavak	pos	IPA	area to southwest of present-day Gambell	see Map 7 in Appendices	Ӯявак
uuyni	pos	IPA	underarm odor	uuyninga ‘his odor’	ӯӥни
uuynite-	pos	IPA	to have a strong underarm odor	No information given.	ӯӥниты-
uvagha-	pos	IPA	"to roll around (of dogs, children); to show by one's body movements and expressions that one is pleased with what is being said about him (slang)"	uvaghaaq ‘he is rolling around’ /	уваӷа-
uvegh-	pos	IPA	to keel over; to topple; to capsize; to overturn; to get carried away with what one is doing	uveghtuq ‘it overturned’ / uuvghaquq ‘it overturns’; uveghtaa ‘he overturned it’	увыӷ-
uveghni-	pos	IPA	to be pleased; to be thankful; to be full of pride and joy	uveghniiq ‘he is pleased’ / uveghnitkaa ‘he is pleased with it’; cf. uvegh-	увыӷни-
uvegtagh-	pos	IPA	to be tossed upwards from a walrus hide held taut around the edges by a group of people; to engage in a traditional “blanket toss”	"uvegtaghtuq ‘he's being tossed up’; uvegtaghtut ‘they are engaged in a blanket-toss’ / uvegtaghtaat ‘they are tossing him up’; Maaten ilangani, kiigyagu, Ungazighmiit uvegtaamalghiit. Qalu uvegtalghiinun aglaamalghii. ‘One time when it was summer, the people of Ungaziq were having a blanket-toss. Qalu went over to those having the blanket toss.’ (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 27)"	увыхтаӷ-
uvegtaq	pos	IPA	"traditional Eskimo ""blanket-toss"""	No information given.	увыхтақ
uvegte-	pos	IPA	to act before something else happens	"uvegllukumi sangan tugunanighsigu? ‘why didn't you take it before that happened?’; Mekelngiighhaam tukughani aqnighlluki mulumaan naangan clinic-mun aglaasimakanga. Health aide-em pimakanga, “Uveglluku tagitqaghhnaqegpenaan.” The little boy hurt his ankle and some time later his mother took him to the clinic. The health aid said to her, “Why didn’t you bring him before (it got bad).”’ (KALLAG. 102)"	увыхты-
uvelegtagh-	pos	IPA	to vibrate; to bounce	uvelegtaghtuq ‘it is vibrating’ / uvelegtaghtaa ‘he is making it vibrate’	увылыхтаӷ-
uveluk	pos	IPA	sea swell; ocean wave	Chukotkan; = evluk	увылюк
uvi-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > uvilighneq, uvita, uvinek, uvitangigh-"	уви-
uvilighneq	pos	IPA	next one; neighbor; relative	uvilighnequtuk ‘they2 are neighbors’	увилиӷнық
uvinek	pos	IPA	human skin; close relative; back part of an animal; torso	uvinkegtaq ‘one with a nice complexion’	увинык
Uvingen	pos	IPA	Anadyr in Chukotka (well southwest of the usual Yupik area)	see Map 1 in Appendices;  = Wingen	Увиңын
uvininghaq	pos	IPA	whale skin and fat with meat on it	No information given.	увининӷақ
uvinke-	pos	IPA	to rely on; to depend on; to confide in	No information given.	увинкы-
uvinkesuggaaq	pos	IPA	young walrus; skin of a small walrus	Chukotkan (R)	увинкысухāқ
uvinkwaa-	pos	IPA	to feel like one is in the same unfortunate situation as another	No information given.	увинкӱā-
uviqliq*	pos	IPA	next one; neighbor; relative	No information given.	увиқльиқ
uvita	pos	IPA	yard around house; kinfolk; area; surface	uvitngani or uvitangani ‘around it’; = uwita	увита
uvitangigh-	pos	IPA	to pass close by (it)	uvitangighaa ‘he passed close by it’ /	увитаңиӷ-
uvitmig-	pos	IPA	to put (it) in the yard	No information given.	увитмьиг-
uvlegh-	pos	IPA	to shimmer; to glitter; to be shiny	"uvleqegtaq ‘glittery thing’; = evlegh-, qavlegh-, qelmegh-"	увлыӷ-
uvleghsagh-	pos	IPA	to shine (it); to polish; to clean thoroughly	uvleghsaghtuq ‘he cleaned himself thoroughly’; uvleghsaghaa ‘he cleaned it thoroughly’ /	увлыҳсяӷ-
uvleghtagh-	pos	IPA	to flash	No information given.	увлыҳтаӷ-
uwita	pos	IPA	yard around house; kinfolk; area; surface	Chukotkan; = uvita	уӱита
uya-1	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > uyaghqutaq, uyamig-, uyamik, uyangsaq, uyangte-, uyaquq"	уя-1
uya-2	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > uyatiite-, uyatu-, uyavaq, uyavagh-"	уя-2
uyaghqutaq	pos	IPA	amulet worn by women to protect their children; dog collar	Chukotkan (R)	уяҳқутақ
uyamig-	pos	IPA	to carry on one’s shoulder	No information given.	уямиг-
uyamik1	pos	IPA	shoulder load	No information given.	уямик1
uyamik2	pos	IPA	needle case	No information given.	уямик2
uyangsaq	pos	IPA	oldsquaw duck (Clangula hyemalis)	No information given.	уяңсяқ
uyangte-	pos	IPA	to stretch one's neck to see better	uyangtuq ‘he stretched to get a better view’	уяңты-
uyaqughiitaq	pos	IPA	necktie; dog collar; scarf	No information given.	уяқуӷӣтақ
uyaqughlliqe-	pos	IPA	to have neck pains	No information given.	уяқуҳльиқы-
Uyaqughviget	pos	IPA	rocks off shore near mouth of Maknek River	see Map 6 in Appendices	Уяқуӷвиӷыт
uyaquq	pos	IPA	neck (anatomical)	"Quyngim, tungtum uyaqghwan asingan melqwi taakelghiit. ‘The hairs under the reindeer’s or caribou’s neck are long.’ (KALLAG. 105)"	уяқуқ
uyataq	pos	IPA	leash; strap; rope for hauling	uyatighluku ‘using a rope to haul it’	уятақ
uyatiite-	pos	IPA	to start to approach; to near; to narrow the distance to (it)	uyatiitaa ‘he started to get closer to it’	уятӣты-
uyatu-	pos	IPA	to be far away; to be distant (in space or time)	uyatuuq ‘it is far’ / naten uyatutkaa? ‘how far is it?’	уяту-
uyatutala	pos	IPA	distance to (it)	uyatutalanga ‘the distance to it’	уятуталя
uyavagh-	pos	IPA	to go far	No information given.	уяваӷ-
uyavaghtaq	pos	IPA	something from far away	No information given.	уяваҳтақ
uyavaq	pos	IPA	distance or distant place	uyavani ‘in the distance’; uyavantuq ‘it is far away’; uyavanun ‘to a distant place’; uyavaneng ‘from a distant place’	уявақ
uyegte-	pos	IPA	to pass things out; to distribute things	"uyegtuq ‘he distributed things’; uyegtaa ‘he passed something out to her, or passed it out’ / uyegtekaaguq or uyegtaaguq ‘it has been distributed’; Aghvengelghiit naasiiqaghhaghmeng mangtagmeng uyegtaghaghtut taglaghyameng. ‘The boat crew that caught a whale distributed small trial portions of muktuk as soon as they came ashore.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 106)"	уӥыхты-
uyengpalla-	pos	IPA	to bounce or bob up and down from a squatting position	uyengpallaaq ‘he is bouncing up and down’ / cf. uyengpalla-	уӥыңпалья-
uyengqagh-	pos	IPA	to slowly bob up and down	cf. uyengpalla-	уӥыңқаӷ-
uygaaq	pos	IPA	"sealskin which has been de-haired, bleached by the winter weather, for use for trim on skin-boots"	No information given.	уӥгāқ
uyghagaq	pos	IPA	pebble; rocky part of mountain; a game using walrus teeth or small stones for counters	No information given.	уӥӷагақ
uyghagtaq	pos	IPA	"rock hanging from and hold in place the walrus hide room of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.); stone sinker on a fishnet "	negaghpagmun qilleghsimiit uyghagtat ‘they tied the sinkers onto the fishnet’	уӥӷахтақ
uyghagtightugh-	pos	IPA	to surround with rocks	No information given.	уӥӷахтиҳтуӷ-
uyghak	pos	IPA	rock; stone	Quutmun taslughluku uyghagem saaghwakun aqumesimakangat. ‘Leading him by the hand to the shore they sat him down beside a rock.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 47)	уӥӷак
uyghamqiighwaq	pos	IPA	pebbles	No information given.	уӥӷамӱӣӱақ
uyghapak	pos	IPA	multitude of rocks	Chukotkan (R)	уӥӷапак
uyghapellegaq	pos	IPA	pebbly beach	No information given.	уӥӷапыльыгақ
uyghapellegaq	pos	IPA	jagged rock	No information given.	уӥӷапыльыгақ
uyghigh-	pos	IPA	to set an anchor (for boat or dogteam)	uyghightuq ‘he set an anchor’; uyghighaa ‘he anchored it’ / uyghiimaaq or uyghighngaaq ‘it is anchored’	уӥӷиӷ-
uyghiin	pos	IPA	anchor	#NAME?	уӥӷӣн
uyghu	pos	IPA	man's sister's child; niece of a man through his sister; nephew of a man through his sister	No information given.	уӥӷу
uygii-	pos	IPA	to bleach sealskin for trimming material	No information given.	уӥгӣ-
uygiinghaq*	pos	IPA	bleached sealskin used for trim	No information given.	уӥгӣнӷақ
uygu-	pos	IPA	to extend; to add length to	"uywaa ‘he extended it, added something to make it longer’ / uygulleqaa ‘he will extend it’; uygutaa ‘he added it onto something’; uygutuq ‘he got into a line of people’; uygututak ‘he connected them2 together; uygutaq ‘an extension’"	уӥгу-
uygu1	pos	IPA	extension	No information given.	уӥгу1
uygu2	pos	IPA	messenger; agent	No information given.	уӥгу2
uygughaq	pos	IPA	extension around top of skin boat	No information given.	уӥгуӷақ
uygulliiq	pos	IPA	"walrus skin put on the front part of roof of the traditional dome-shaped house, the mangteghapik (q.v.); newly formed extension of sea ice"	"may be used in the dual, uygulliighek, for one; see item 96 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004"	уӥгульиқ
uyguma-	pos	IPA	to coo (to); to play laughingly (of children); to be attracted to each other (of young adults); to tease in a friendly way	"uygumaaq ‘he cooed to a baby’; uygumaa ‘he cooed to it’ / uygumatut ‘they are playing laughingly with each other, attracted to each other’"	уӥгума-
uyguneq	pos	IPA	connection; joint; knot; seam; extension piece	No information given.	уӥгунық
uygunghigh-	pos	IPA	to disconnect an extension; to untie	No information given.	уӥгунӷиӷ-
uyguraq	pos	IPA	embroidery on the top of a reindeer-leg skin-boot	"Chukotkan (R); used in the plural, uygurat, for one such embroidery"	уӥгурақ
uyguregagh-	pos	IPA	to embellish or otherwise add to a story	No information given.	уӥгурыгаӷ-
uyguusaq	pos	IPA	gift	Chukotkan (R)	уӥгӯсяқ
uyiighaq	pos	IPA	rope made from hide from a bearded seal	No information given.	уӥӣӷақ
uyiiq	pos	IPA	"heavy, thick, rope made from hide of a baby walrus"	No information given.	уӥӣқ
uyiq	pos	IPA	trimming from white suede on skin-boots	Chukotkan (R)	уӥиқ
Uyneq	pos	IPA	first point on west coast south of Gambell; Ooynik Pt. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Уӥнық
uyug-	pos	IPA	to have sexual intercourse	cf. usuk	уюг-
uyughaq*	pos	IPA	younger sibling	cf. uyuqliq	уюӷақ
uyuq	pos	IPA	hey you!	vocative particle; look under una	уюқ
uyuqliq*	pos	IPA	younger one	cf. uyughaq	уюқльиқ
uyvala-	pos	IPA	to practice sorcery	uyvalaaq ‘he is practicing sorcery’; uyvalaa ‘he is practicing sorcery on her (either to her detriment or to her benefit)’ /	уӥваля-
uyvalakegtaq	pos	IPA	powerful shaman who is inclined to do harm	Chukotkan (R)	уӥвалакыхтақ
uyvasaghqe-	pos	IPA	to ward off evil spirits or sorcery by performing rituals	cf. uyvala	уӥвасяҳқы-
uyviineq	pos	IPA	sorceror; evil shaman	No information given.	уӥвӣнық
uyviligh-	pos	IPA	to forbid; to convince	Chukotkan (R)	уӥвилиӷ-
uzifqaghte-	pos	IPA	to revolve fast or suddenly	No information given.	узифқаҳты-
uziftaghwaaq	pos	IPA	toy top	No information given.	узифтаӷӱāқ
uziftaq	pos	IPA	beheading device made of a whale shoulder blade; toy top	No information given.	узифтақ
uzimun	pos	IPA	in a circle; circumferentially; all around	adverbial particle; qukaa aangqam igaqraghllaguuq uzimun ‘the middle of the ball has decorations all around it’	узимун
uziva	pos	IPA	circular thing; vertebra of a whale; circular disk of cartilage	No information given.	узива
uzive-	pos	IPA	to revolve; to go around; to rotate	"uzivuq ‘he or it revolved or went around something’; uzivaa ‘he or it went around it’ / uziftaa ‘he made it go around, spun it’; uzivutaa ‘he went around with it’"	узивы-
uziveketaagh-	pos	IPA	to spin; to go circles rapidly	Chukotkan (R); qikmiq suumegkaq uziveketaaghaquq ‘the rabid dog is running in circles’	узивыкытāӷ-
uzivgagh-	pos	IPA	to keep on revolving or going around something	No information given.	узивгаӷ-
uzivneghtu-	pos	IPA	to revolve fast or often	No information given.	узивныҳту-
uzivneq	pos	IPA	circular section; revolution	No information given.	узивнық
vegaaq	pos	IPA	grass	"Uksaanghani vegaaqlu, nunivagseghaqlu paliqestanghani nemi tawani quuggutaqelghiit. ‘When autumn comes and grass and tundra vegetation start to turn brown, then they gather their wood supply in the house.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 51)"	выгāқ
veghaq	pos	IPA	whale fin; propeller	No information given.	выӷақ
veghite-	pos	IPA	to somersault in the air; to flip over forward (of a whale or person)	No information given.	выӷиты-
veghsaghtugh-	pos	IPA	to go over to retrieve	No information given.	выҳсяҳтуӷ-
veghte-	pos	IPA	to take back something one has sold or given away; to repossess	veghtaa ‘he took it back’ /	выҳты-
veghute-	pos	IPA	to give something back	veghutaa ‘he gave it back’ /	выӷуты-
vegllengestaq	pos	IPA	washcloth	No information given.	выхльыңыстақ
veglluk	pos	IPA	towel	"this is the term used on St. Lawrence Is.; in Chukotka, the English loanward, tawli, is used"	выхльюк
vegsegaq	pos	IPA	bits of loose grass	No information given.	выхсыгақ
vegtaaq	pos	IPA	bumble bee	Vegtaaghem panaanga iggemkun. ‘A bumble bee stung me on my hand.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 174)	выхтāқ
vegtaasiq	pos	IPA	sickle	Chukotkan (R)	выхтāсиқ
vegtagh-	pos	IPA	to gather grass	No information given.	выхтаӷ-
vek	pos	IPA	"grass; grass insulation of the aagra, the inner room of traditional dome-shaped house"	"used in the plural, veget, for rag for washing dishes or mop"	вык
velaglenga	pos	IPA	cranberry	Chukotkan (R)	выляглыңа
vewaaq	pos	IPA	"grass basket, tray or mat"	No information given.	выӱāқ
vighvi-	pos	IPA	annoyed at one’s hyperactivity	emotional root; vighvinaghtaq ‘he is annoyingly hyperactive’; vighvinaq ‘hyperactive person’; vighviyugtuq ‘he is annoyed at someone being hyperactive’; vighvikaa or vighviyukaa ‘he is annoyed at her being hyperactive’	виӷви-
vullupak	pos	IPA	hummock; bush grass	Chukotkan (R); cf. vek	вульюпак
vuu-	pos	IPA	to pile up (of ice on the water); to jam (of ice)	"vuuguq ‘the ice is piling up, forming pressure ridges’ /"	вӯ-
"vuuneq, vuuleq"	pos	IPA	pressure ridge; piled-up ice; ice jam	"see item 97 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004; = uusleq, vuusleq"	"вӯнық, вӯлық"
vuusleq	pos	IPA	pressure ridge; piled-up ice; ice jam	"see item 97 on list in Oozeva et al. 2004; = uusleq, vuuneq"	вӯсльық
vuvalla	pos	IPA	ceremony held annually by a family or clan at the time of a new moon involving the offering of choice pieces of meat	Chukotkan; = puvalla	вувалья
vuveltu	pos	IPA	lemming (Lemmus sp.)	#NAME?	вувыльту
vuveq	pos	IPA	walrus skin flooring usually made from old boat skins	"usually made from old boat skins; used in the dual, vuuvghek, for one floor"	вувық
vuvin	pos	IPA	ruff on parka hood; fur trimming on hat	Chukotkan (R); = puvin	вувин
waak-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > waakaghte-, waakenghillghaghte-, waakigate-, waaknanigh-"	ӱāк-
waakaghsigate-	pos	IPA	to be inattentive; to be unaware	No information given.	ӱāкаҳсигаты-
waakaghte-	pos	IPA	to be attentive	No information given.	ӱāкаҳты-
waakenghillghaghte-	pos	IPA	to startle; to surprise; to scare	No information given.	ӱāкынӷильҳаҳты-
waakigate-	pos	IPA	to not care; to not respond; to not pay attention	No information given.	ӱāкигаты-
waaknanigh-	pos	IPA	to lose interest; to get distracted; to get sidetracked	No information given.	ӱāкньаниӷ-
waame-	pos	IPA	to rush around; to hurry for fear of running out of time	No information given.	ӱāмы-
waamsegaq	pos	IPA	deception	Chukotkan (R)	ӱāмсыга́қ
waamte-	pos	IPA	to joke; to kid; to tease; to fool	"Waamtamken, nayagitunga avangitunga ‘I was fooling you, I don’t have a sister, I don’t have one’ (AYUM. UNGIP. I:8); = uremte-"	ӱāмты-
waapae	pos	IPA	tow rope for boat	also used in Chukotka	ӱāпаы
waari	pos	IPA	wigwam shaped skin tent; tripodlike structure; trivet used in cooking	No information given.	ӱāри
waasae	pos	IPA	"watch (pocket-watch, wristwatch, etc.)"	"used in the dual, waasek, for one watch; also used in Chukotka; Naaka Ngawenga qepghaghaquq igaghvigmi. Apeghtughaqii taghnughhaat. 8 Marta naaka tuunumaat waasegneng igaghvigmi. ‘My mother Ngawenga works in the school. She teaches the children. On March 8 (“woman’s day” in Russia) they gave my mother a watch in the school.’ (BUKVAR’ 46)"	ӱāсаы
waaypae	pos	IPA	net shuttle	"also dual, waaypek, for one shuttle"	ӱāӥпаы
wag’tiili-	pos	IPA	to leave a place of rest	Chukotkan (R)	ӱагтӣли-
waghiipae	pos	IPA	sewn stripe on a back of coveralls	Chukotkan (R)	ӱаӷӣпаы
walamnaag-	pos	IPA	to file	No information given.	ӱалямнāг-
walamnaak	pos	IPA	file; rasp	No information given.	ӱалямнāк
walenkequn	pos	IPA	thank you	Chukotkan; exclamatory particle	ӱалынкықун
walenqwekqun	pos	IPA	at least	particle; walenqwekqun tuunlughaa ‘at least he gave him a little piece’	ӱалынқӱыкқун
walguyaak	pos	IPA	snowshoe	"walguyaagek ‘pair of snowshoes’; Aa, maghyaghqughaqegkanginkut walguyaagluni. ‘Yes, he’d lead us going on snowshoes.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:156)"	ӱалгуя̄к
wallu	pos	IPA	or maybe	conjunctive particle; Natungutanga puygaaqa unangwaa wallu iignangwaallu. ‘I forgot which one; it could be this one or it could be that one.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 175); cf. walluumllu	ӱалью
walluumllu	pos	IPA	or maybe	"conjunctive particle; Agaankut nagaqughaqanka Saghumigenkugnguq Naaghuluunkuk avaqutaqiit walluumllu naagket maalghuk. ‘I heard about Agaq and his siblings that they were the sons of Saghumik and Naaghuluq, but possiby with two different mothers.’ (SIVUQ. NANGHAGH. 3:9)"	ӱалью̄млью
Walqela	pos	IPA	Uel’kal’ in Chukotka (southwest of main Yupik area)	see Map 1 in Appendices; = Welqela	Ӱалльқыля
wamelqa	pos	IPA	arched anterior bow of a sled	Chukotkan	ӱамыльқа
wamen'gu	pos	IPA	"salamander or similar non-local animal (toad, frog)"	Chukotkan; possibly specifically the Siberian Salamander (Hynobius keyserlingi)	ӱамынгу
wangen’gu	pos	IPA	shaft bow or rail of dogsled	No information given.	ӱаңынгу
wangi-	pos	IPA	to sew	Chukotkan	ӱаңи-
wangilqe-	pos	IPA	to be occupied (with); to be engaged (in)	Chukotkan (R)	ӱаңильқы-
wani	pos	IPA	bell	Lengaaghuunnaqaqa wani. ‘I’m going to ring the bell.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 175)	ӱани
"waniwanllu, waniwanngam"	pos	IPA	not at all	particle	"ӱаниӱанлью, ӱаниӱанңам"
wanlegi	pos	IPA	more than ever	particle; anglimaaten ‘wanlegi you have grown more than ever!’; wanlegi anigu ughugllagaa ‘more than ever now the snow is melting’; Ugingan wanlegi nuliini qiitghumakanga. ‘Her husband beat his wife all the more.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 9)	ӱанлыги
wanlegingam	pos	IPA	and yet all the more	particle	ӱанлыгиңам
wapaaqa	pos	IPA	dried amanita (fly-agaric); opium; marijuana	No information given.	ӱапāқа
wapen’gu	pos	IPA	disease of animals with tumors and abcesses	Chukotkan (R)	ӱапынгу
waran	pos	IPA	at least	"particle; waran tuunaghtinga ‘at least give me some’; waran eslalluwiitaghtaqsaqumi ‘at least it should stop raining once in a while’; waran siqinghuughtaghtaqsaqumi ‘at least the sun should come out once in a while’; Waranwha avaqutaqelleqamtek. ‘At least then, I’ll have you two as my children.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 36)"	ӱаран
wasaq	pos	IPA	as I told you (in contrast to what you expected)	"particle; wasaq piiqamken esgha eslallugughhnaqniluku ‘you see I told you that it would rain’; wasaq taginaqenghinniiqan, tagiiq ‘you thought he wasn't coming, but he came’; wasaq kukriqniiquten ighaghyami, naamigteqrugan pinitun ‘you said you were having a hard time in school, but you completed it well’"	ӱасяқ
wasi	pos	IPA	as it turns out	"particle; wasi tagiightaquq panigan tagistaa ‘she never came before but her daughter made her come over’; wasi piyugmeng meghtaqaghaquq ullghitalguluni, maaten ullghitiighulluni piyugmeng meghtaghllak ‘he never went to get water by walking when he had a three-wheeler, but now since he doesn't have his three-wheeler anymore he gets water by walking’"	ӱаси
wasiwa	pos	IPA	as usual	particle; wasiwa uksuqun aqlaghaghllak ‘as usual it will be so cold this winter’; wasiwa meeting-elghiit taaqneghllugllaget ‘as usual the meeting won't end for a long time’	ӱасиӱа
wata	pos	IPA	more; furthermore	particle; wata tuuninga ‘give me more!’; wata anuqliimakanga ‘it has gotten more windy’; wata pituuq tawa ‘it has grown more’; piitesiighaat wata nagughllagumaat ‘the flowers have grown more’; kiigyaqminigu wata puqlaghtaa ‘it has become warmer now that summer is here’	ӱата
wataghllak	pos	IPA	much more; be sure and act	particle;  wataghllak tagilghaasi ‘be sure and come!’	ӱатаҳльяк
watapae	pos	IPA	moss; reindeer moss (Thamnolia vermicularis)	No information given.	ӱатапаы
wataqaaghaq	pos	IPA	a little more	particle	ӱатақāӷақ
wawernga-	pos	IPA	to maul; to fight (of dog)	"Yugem panini pii, “Uyughaan iigna qikmimeng awiitesqigu wawerngannaqaanguq.” ‘The man said to his daughter, “Go tell your brother over there to move away from the dog, it’s going to maul him.” (SULUWET 109)"	ӱаӱырңа-
"waya, wayaq1"	pos	IPA	wire	Kenghem wayaa laagutaghput. ‘We dug [a trench] for the electric line.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 83); also used in Chukotka	"ӱая, ӱаяқ1"
wayagh-	pos	IPA	to despoil; to pillage	"Qineghlluni, pimalghii, ""Iiwennguq ellmineng wayaghyaghtughlleqiisi.""Arepakim pimakanga, ""Tagilinguq wayaghyaghtughlinkut."" ‘Looking in he said, “If you don’t he will come and pillage you.” Arepaki told him, “Tell him that he may come and pillage us.” (UNGAZ. UNGIP. 26)"	ӱаяӷ-
wayaq2	pos	IPA	slave taken by force from another group; captive	No information given.	ӱаяқ2
"welqae, welqa"	pos	IPA	ash; slag; dross	Chukotkan	"ӱыльқаы, ӱыльқа"
Welqela	pos	IPA	Uel’kal’ in Chukotka (southwest of main Yupik area)	see Map 1 in Appendices; = Walqela	Ӱылльқыля
weni	pos	IPA	come on; go ahead; better do it	"particle; used to encourage action lest an opportunity be lost; weni enta ketelta amsanaaluku ‘come on let's go out in the sea while it is still calm’; egmiinaq weni, kingunnaqiinkut church-mun ‘hurry up, we're going to be late for church’; weni taayughqi tengegkayuget nuughtughlleqaten ‘better hurry up, you might miss the plane’"	ӱыни
wenigh-	pos	IPA	to say “ah”;  to be surprised	Chukotkan (V&E)	ӱыниӷ-
weninquq	pos	IPA	not in the least	particle; weninquq tugulleqamken ‘I wouldn't in the least care to marry you!’	ӱынинқуқ
weniqruk	pos	IPA	I should say not!	particle	ӱыниқшук
wesqaawi-	pos	IPA	to feel defeated; to feel incapable; to lack confidence; to lose hope; to despair	#NAME?	ӱысқāӱи-
wetku	pos	IPA	not until; only when	particle; wetku unaami igaghyaghllequnga ‘I won't go to school until tomorrow’; wetku atazi kaaskan neghellequkut ‘we'll eat when your father arrives and not until then’; piinliitanga wetku movie-m atuumaan liigikaqa esghaqaqeftaqa ‘not until the first part of the movie had been shown did I realize that I'd already seen it’; 	ӱытку
wetngaqwa-	pos	IPA	to crack from the cold	Aqlaghaghhneghaniqun mangteghat saaqelghiit miigtaghaqelghiit wetngaaqwaaqelghiit aqlaghami. ‘Whenever it got cold the houses would make a thudding noise and (the earth parts) would crack in the cold.’  (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 2:260); cf. wetngegh-	ӱытңьақӱьа-
wetngegh-	pos	IPA	"to burst, burst, break or drack, especially due to temperature change (as ice cracking in the winter, or a container that freezes and cracks)"	wetngeghtuq ‘it cracked or burst’ / wengeghtaa ‘it made it crack’; cf. wetngaqwa-	ӱытңьыӷ-
wha-	pos	IPA	right here; now	"demonstrative adverb base; whani ‘here’; whavek ‘to here; look under una, the corresponding demonstrative pronoun"	ӱьа-
whaa	pos	IPA	used with interrogative verbs to intensify the questioning	particle	ӱьā
whaa maaten	pos	IPA	just now; right now	particle	хӱа мāтын
whaamik	pos	IPA	son (endearing term)	No information given.	хӱāмик
whaante-	pos	IPA	to be here	"whaantuq ‘it is here’; Qineghlluni aapsimakanga,   ""Nagu Taykegergen?"" Taykegergem akisimakanga, ""Whaantunga!"" ‘Peeking in he asked him, “Where is Taykegergen?” Taykegergem anwered, “I am here!”’"	ӱьāнты-
whaawha	pos	IPA	at least; better than nothing; again and again	"particle; whaawha tuunaaten mekestaaghhaaghngaan qinunaghqegpenangam ‘at least he has given you some even though it is only a little, so quit fussing’; whaawha tuunaqaaten avangiteghngaaghmi ‘at least she gives you something even if she doesn't have much’; whaawha latamaaqaaten qepghaghllagmini ‘at least she writes to you even if she is busy’; whaawha iteghtuq ‘she keeps coming in’; aghnelqusiq tuqlughraghtuq, whaawha tuqlughiiq ‘all day long he kept calling -- he called again and again’"	ӱьāӱьа
whamiigh-	pos	IPA	to adopt as one's child; to acquire	"whamiighaa ‘he adopted him, acquired it’ / whamiighiiq ‘he adopted a child’"	ӱьамӣӷ-
whang-	pos	IPA	No information given.	"personal pronoun base; whanga ‘I, me’; whangkuta ‘we, us’;  whangkutung ‘we2, us2’; whangkutestun ‘in our language, in our way of doing things’; Atanga taghtughtuq. Aapsimakanga, “Kinanguzin?” Ukamangaan akisimakanga, “Whangangunga.” ‘Her father woke up. He asked her, “Who are you?” Ukamangaan answered him. “I am me”. (UNGIPAGHAGH. 6)"	ӱьаң-
whani	pos	IPA	right here	particle; whaantuq ‘it is here’	ӱьани
whanikun	pos	IPA	later on; in the evening	adverbial particle	ӱьаникун
whanistaaghhaq*	pos	IPA	immediately	particle	ӱьанистāҳақ
whaten	pos	IPA	like this; this way	adverbial particle	ӱьатын
whatete-	pos	IPA	to be like this; to be this way	whatetuq ‘it is like this’ / whatetngwaaghtuq ‘it is exactly like this’; whatelnguq ‘one like this’	ӱьатыты-
wiin	pos	IPA	not yet; not now; still (not changing yet)	"particle; wiin pinaanghitunga ‘I will not go yet’; wiin aanefqaavek ‘don't leave yet’; wiin aatefqaayek ayapghaataghken ‘don't put on your mittens yet’; Mekelghiighhaam nayaggani pimakanga “Wiin maani ataasimeng qavaaltung.” ‘The boy told his sister, “Let’s sleep here one more night still.”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 35)"	ӱӣн
wiinqun	pos	IPA	wait and see; not yet	particle	ӱӣнқун
"wiintaku, wiintakun"	pos	IPA	not yet; wait	particle	"ӱӣнтаку, ӱӣнтакун"
wiirqa	pos	IPA	depressions and bumps in ice and snow	Chukotkan	ӱӣшқа
Wingen	pos	IPA	Anadyr in Chukotka (well southwest of the usual Yupik area)	see Map 1 in Appendices;  = Uvingen	Ӱиңын
wisqaawi-	pos	IPA	to feel defeated; to feel incapable; to lack confidence; to lose hope; to despair	"Chukotkan (R, V&E); = wesqaawi"	ӱисқāӱи-
wu-hu-hu-hu-huu	pos	IPA	a call to the  master of the heavens	#NAME?	ӱу-гу-гу-гу-гӯ
yaag-1	pos	IPA	to crouch	No information given.	я̄г-1
yaag-2	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > yaagigh-, yaagkestaaghaq, yaagtu-"	я̄г-2
yaag-3	pos	IPA	No information given.	"root; > yaagneq, yaagtagh-, yaagpagte-, yaagtagh-"	я̄г-3
yaagigh-	pos	IPA	to remove large pieces to make the contents uniform; to chop up; to crush	No information given.	я̄гиӷ-
yaagkestaaq	pos	IPA	"thing with small delicate features, patterns or actions"	yaagkestaaghuuq or yaagkestaaghhaaguq ‘it has small delicate features’	я̄хкыстāқ
Yaagmelnguq	pos	IPA	Yaghmelngak Mtn. on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 4 in Appendices	Я̄гмылңуқ
yaagneq	pos	IPA	length from fingertips of one arm stretched out the side across the chest to bent elbow of other arm stretched in the opposite direction	No information given.	я̄гнық
yaagpagte-	pos	IPA	to dance hard when drummers drum hard	"kallagpanghata aghulalghiit yaagpagtaqut ‘when the drummers drum hard, the dancers dance hard’"	я̄хпахты-
yaagtagh-	pos	IPA	to pull hand over hand	No information given.	я̄хтаӷ-
yaagtu-	pos	IPA	"to have large prominent features, patterns or actions"	yaagtuuq ‘it has large prominent features’	я̄хту-
yaakestaaghhaq	pos	IPA	light (in pressure) thing	"… ilangakun yaakestaaghhaawaqluni, ilangakun qevuutepigtaqluni suupegkayuk. ‘… sometimes it can blow lightly, sometimes strong.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 26); Qenwat mekelghiighhaam yaakestaaghhaan aagullughaa temngi. ‘So the little boy tapped her body lightly.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3: 204)"	я̄кыстāҳақ
yaamgat	pos	IPA	water plant of some sort; algae	Chukotkan; exact identification undetermined; this is a plural	я̄мгат
yaan	pos	IPA	upper yardarm for a sail	Chukotkan (R); yaatet ‘yardarms’	я̄н
yaave-	pos	IPA	to row	yaavuq ‘he rowed’; yaavaa ‘he rowed across it’ /	я̄вы-
yaavghagh-	pos	IPA	to continue to row	No information given.	я̄вӷаӷ-
yaavuqugh-	pos	IPA	to continue to row	No information given.	я̄вуқуӷ-
yaavuquun	pos	IPA	oar	No information given.	я̄вуқӯн
yaavutaq	pos	IPA	stretcher of whale rib used in pairs to stretch walrus skin on boat	No information given.	я̄вутақ
yaawaati	pos	IPA	large sled pulled by reindeer	"used in the dual, yaawaatik, for one sled"	я̄ӱāти
yaawagh-	pos	IPA	to add oil to fire to make it burn better	No information given.	я̄ӱаӷ-
yaayasi-	pos	IPA	to waste; to be mischievous; to take things for granted	"yaayasiiq ‘he is wasting something’, ‘he is mischievous’ / yaayasitkaa ‘he is wasting it’; Qerngughteggu tamaana neghumangilkangat, yaayasitkegpenaan. ‘Gather what they didn’t eat; don’t waste it.’ (John 6.12)"	я̄яси-
yagarina	pos	IPA	stick with loop on one end and sharp iron head on the other (used as a brake) to control a dog-sled	No information given.	ягарина
yaghaghaghte-	pos	IPA	to become disjointed by being bent too far in the wrong direction (of person or animal or its limb)	No information given.	яӷаӷаҳты-
yaghlegi	pos	IPA	instead; but; yet; contrary to expectation	"particle; Ukamangaan araghtuq, ""Kayngengunghitunga, aghnaghhaguunga!"" Yaghlegi mulaaghtuq kayngestun. ‘Ukamangaan cried out, “I am not a bear, I am a girl.” Yet she roared like a bear.’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 4); = yeghlegi"	яӷлыги
yaghlegillu	pos	IPA	also no; on the contrary	particle	яӷлыгилью
yaghrantate-	pos	IPA	to increase; to love more; to pay more attention	No information given.	яӷрантаты-
yaghripa	pos	IPA	drill used for wood	yaghripegnekun ukiqughyaghqaq igarutaaghteghumaat ‘they drilled holes with the wood drill’	яӷрипа
yagtaghagh-	pos	IPA	to fly low (of birds); to crouch (of people)	No information given.	яхтаӷаӷ-
yakeregtagh-	pos	IPA	to speak quietly; to whisper	No information given.	якырыхтаӷ-
yakiisghaqi-	pos	IPA	to beat everyone in a competition	"basketball-elghiit ingluteng yakiisghaqiit ‘in the basketball game, they beat their opponents big time’"	якӣсҳақи-
yakugh-	pos	IPA	in danger; fearful of danger	emotional root; yakughnaghtuq ‘it is dangerous’; yakughyugtuq ‘he is fearful of danger’; yakuqaa ‘he is fearful of its danger’; Yakughyugpenanga pugimameng aghvightunga inglunganun. ‘Without being fearful I crossed to its opposite side by swimming.’ (SULUWET 47)	якуӷ-
yakughniigh-	pos	IPA	to travel in a risky or dangerous area or conditions	"piyaa kellini yakughniighluni kagimleghwaaghmi pegnem quutmun uugsimalghii ‘the hunter on the sea ice was traveling in a dangerous area where it (the ice) was crumbly, and he barely reached land’"	якуӷнӣӷ-
yakughte-	pos	IPA	"to be careful, quiet and cautious"	cf. yakugh-; Nefkaghaqut yakughtepiglluteng. ‘They watch for seals at theri blow holes very quietly.’ (SLI JR. DICT. 116)	якуҳты-
yakughute-	pos	IPA	to respect religous mourning over a person’s death	Chukotkan (R)	якуӷуты-
yakumangigh-	pos	IPA	to correct oneself	Chukotkan (R); cf. yakugh-	якумаңиӷ-
yakumangilnguq*	pos	IPA	careless person (with regard to his actions)	No information given.	якумаңилңуқ
yakungigh-	pos	IPA	to raise the voice; to pretend to be unafraid	aleghqulgun nallunatun yakungightuq ‘the interlocutor is yelling senselessly’; temngiraaghinaq yakungighaquq ‘he is pretending to be unafraid of anything’	якуңиӷ-
yakuqe-	pos	IPA	to be careful; to be quiet	No information given.	якуқы-
yakuqigate-	pos	IPA	to be careless; to be boisterous	No information given.	якуқигаты-
yamrra-	pos	IPA	to announce one’s accomplishments	does not have the negative connotation of ‘bragging’; yamrraaq ‘he is telling or showing what he has accomplished’; yamrraa ‘he is telling or showing her what he has accomplished’ / yamrratkaa ‘he is tell about it or showing it (the thing he has accomplished)’	ямша-
yanga	pos	IPA	hole covered by patch in hide roof of house	No information given.	яңа
yanutqu-	pos	IPA	to interrrupt other’s talking	No information given.	янутқу-
yapelae	pos	IPA	person of low status; pawn in checkers; low player in a game	No information given.	япыляы
yapuyengi-	pos	IPA	to do something different to alter the usual routine	"qikmiq petugtaaq ilemutaa yapuyengisqelluku ‘he let the dog loose, so it can do things it doesn’t normally do when tied’"	япуӥыңи-
yaqellengataq	pos	IPA	butterfly; butterfly-shaped toggle	No information given.	яқыльыңатақ
yaqghighagh-	pos	IPA	to hit or hurt on the wing	yaqghighaghtuq ‘it got hit on its wing’; yaqghighaghaa ‘he hit it on its wing’ /	яқҳиӷаӷ-
yaqghighaq	pos	IPA	broken wing	No information given.	яқҳиӷақ
yaqii-	pos	IPA	to move with wings; to wing	yaqiiguq ‘it winged its way through the air ‘/	яқӣ-
yaqiiraq	pos	IPA	wooden handle of a skin scraper	"used in the dual, yaqiirak, for one scraper"	яқӣрақ
Yaqughmii(t)	pos	IPA	a particular clan	Chukotkan (V&E)	Яқуӷми(т)
yaquke-	pos	IPA	to be rough with	No information given.	яқукы-
yaqulek	pos	IPA	angel	"literally, ‘one with wings’; used in Bible translation;  akuzikayuguyaghngaaghma yugetlu yaqulgetlu akuzillghistun, …. ‘Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, ….’ (1 Corinthians 13.1)"	яқулык
yaquq	pos	IPA	wing	yaqghwani ‘on its wing’	яқуқ
yaquqegsagh-	pos	IPA	to flap wings before taking off in flight	yaquqegsaghtuq ‘it is flapping its wings preparatory to flight’ /	яқуқыхсяӷ-
yaresa	pos	IPA	rice	No information given.	ярыся
Yarga	pos	IPA	site on south shore of Arakamchechen Is. in Chukotka	see Map 3 in Appendices	Я̄рга
yataaghqe-	pos	IPA	to prepare; to get ready	yataaghquq ‘he got ready’; yataaghqaa ‘he got it or her ready’ / yataaghqutaa ‘he got ready for it’; yataaghqegkaq ‘something that is ready for use’; yataaghqumaaq ‘he has gotten ready’; yataaghqenneghmeng taaqluni … ‘when he finished getting ready …; ’	ятāҳқы-
yataang	pos	IPA	ready; prepared; equipped	particle; yataang ayuqunga ‘I am ready’	ятāң
yavlu	pos	IPA	sweetheart	#NAME?	явлю
yayiiqa	pos	IPA	rough-legged hawk (Buteo lagopus)	No information given.	яӥӣқа
yayuugg	pos	IPA	should go well; good luck	"particle; kina kayalqiinaqelleqa, yayuug! ‘I wonder who will win, good luck!’"	яӥӯх
yaywaalae	pos	IPA	orphan	#NAME?	яӥӱāляы
yaywaali	pos	IPA	orphan	"Taakughnguq nengyuqutalghiik yaywaalingiighhaankuk, aatgha Saymegerngen, eltughaghaa taana. ‘They were, it is said, a grandmother and her little orphan grandchild, his name was Saymegerngen, that grandchild of hers.’ (AYUM. UNGIP. IV:12); = yaywaalae"	яӥӱāли
Yaywaalingiighhaq	pos	IPA	hill with VABM “Negro” on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Яӥӱāлиңӣҳақ
yaywaasae	pos	IPA	one who has safely escaped danger	No information given.	яӥӱāсяы
yaywaaseng	pos	IPA	safely	particle; Tawaten qamaglluta yaywaaseng uuglleghaatukut quutmun. ‘And we all got safely up onto the shore.’ (Acts 27.44)	яӥӱāсың
yeghlegi	pos	IPA	instead; but; yet; contrary to expectation	particle; yeghlegi alla tagitaa ‘instead he brought something else’; = yaghlegi	ӥыӷлыги
yeghrat	pos	IPA	too much (even for them to do); very much	"particle; Tamaani laluramkem neqanga piyaqnalghii, taaghtami yeghrat. ‘At that time white man’s food was hard to come by, hardeven for the doctor.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:106); Kiyang aatghet yeghrat taakeghllalghlit takelliluki ateliitkayugiit. ‘Sometimes the names would be so long even for them that they give them shorter versions of them.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:184); ""Wetku quyngighsi avegluku tagivaqufsigu taawa unguvaghlleqaqa."" Pimakangat, ""Yeghrat tawaatesigatut alignaghngaaghmeng!"" ‘“Only if you give me half the reindeer, then I’ll bring it back to life.” They told him, “That’s too much to do, even for shamans.”’ (UNGIPAGHAGH. 103); "	ӥыӷрат
"yeghyiqe-, yeghyake-"	pos	IPA	to feel an aversion to certain foods	yeghyiquq ‘he feels averse to eating certain foods’ / yeghyiqutkaa ‘he feels averse to eating it’	"ӥыӷӥиқы-, ӥыӷьякы-"
yelaargae	pos	IPA	blue fox (Vulpes fulva var.)	Chukotkan	ӥыля̄ргаы
yeqay	pos	IPA	let's do it	"particle; Tawaten kiyaghteghngaagmek anipam meteghlluk pimakanga, ""Yeqay igaqraghwaaghuteltung, pinighnaghsaateltung .” ‘As they were living like that the owl said to the raven, “Let’s go ahead and decorate each other, make each other nice.” ‘ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:222)"	ӥықаӥ
yeqayngan	pos	IPA	not again	particle	ӥықаӥңан
yiillgagh-	pos	IPA	to act (especially to leave) suddenly or unexpectedly	No information given.	ӥӣльхаӷ-
yiillgi-	pos	IPA	to gossip; to talk about behind one’s back (or in a way that the target is expected not to understand)	"yiillgiiq ‘he's gossiping’; yiillgii ‘he's gossiping about her’ / Entaqun whaten piiqii, ""Taana yuuk yiillgiyaqunaan, tusaqegkayuguftuq whaa.” ‘Maybe he told them, “Be sure not to talk about him behind his back as he might be able to understand.”’"	ӥӣльхи-
yiista	pos	IPA	yeast; loaf of bread	No information given.	ӥӣста
yilghaaghtaq	pos	IPA	walrus sleeping while swimming	Chukotkan (R)	ӥилӷāҳтақ
yimi-	pos	IPA	shy; intimidated; cowering	"emotional root; yimiyugtuq ‘he feels shy, intimidated’; yiminaghtuq ‘he is intimidating’; yimikaa or yimiyukaa ‘he feels intimidated by him’; yimitaghtuq ‘he is shy by nature’; = yumi-"	ӥими-
yite-	pos	IPA	to advise against doing something; to warn	"Iitek yitaghyaghaqa umiilgataghaaghtekaalghiinga tamaani. … Seghleghhalek tugunaqiinkut taawa, yitaataghyaghaqa. ‘In as much as I had been promoted to mate (assistant to the captain), I tried to talk him out of it. … Once again I tried to discourage him because I thought they might seize us.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:146)"	ӥиты-
yu(u)k	pos	IPA	person; man (male person); mankind; crewman	"base is yug- (however yuuk one person or one man, or all mankind); yuget ‘people’; yugllak ‘big person’; cf. sullevneq; the dual and plural are used in forming the Yupik numerals from forty on: yugek maalghuk ‘forty’ (literally, ‘two twenties’); yugek ataasiq ‘forty one’ (literally, ‘two twenties (plus) one’), yuget pingayut ‘sixty’ (literally, ‘three twenties’)"	юк -- ю̄к
yugaaq1	pos	IPA	powerful person; important person	No information given.	югāқ1
yugaaq2	pos	IPA	tall upright rock	Chukotkan (R)	югāқ2
yugayu	pos	IPA	common loon (Gavia immer)	"more generally, any loon; = yuwayu"	югаю
yughagh-	pos	IPA	to pray; to worship	yughaghtuq ‘he is praying’ / yughaatkaa ‘he is praying on account of it’; Yughaneghpesini piniiyugneghestun pigpenasi. ‘When you pray do not be like the hypocrites.’ (MATT. 6:5)	юӷаӷ-
yughaghta	pos	IPA	minister; preacher; clergyman	No information given.	юӷаҳта
yughaghvik	pos	IPA	church	No information given.	юӷаӷвик
yughqutaq	pos	IPA	blade of grass	No information given.	юҳқутақ
yugilgaghllak	pos	IPA	old barren female bearded seal (Erignathus barbatus)	Chukotkan	югилгаҳльяк
yuginaq	pos	IPA	twenty	"though the Yupik numerical system is base 20, the numerals from 40 are expressed with yu(u)k (q.v.)"	югинақ
yugniite-	pos	IPA	to be homely	No information given.	югнӣты-
yugpagaghaq*	pos	IPA	dwarf (legendary)	No information given.	юхпагаӷақ
yugpak	pos	IPA	elderly man; big person; important person	No information given.	юхпак
yugpallaghte-	pos	IPA	to get old	No information given.	юхпальяҳты-
yugrukutaaq	pos	IPA	giant; huge man	No information given.	югрукутāқ
yugsange-1	pos	IPA	to become aware of someone's presence	yugsanguq ‘he became aware that someone was present’ /	юхсяңы-1
yugsange-2	pos	IPA	to lift up the head	Chukotkan (R)	юхсяңы-2
yugsughagh-	pos	IPA	to look around	"Chukotkan (R, V&E)"	юхсюӷаӷ-
yugsugnite-	pos	IPA	to resemble a man or a person	No information given.	юхсюгниты-
yugtaaneq	pos	IPA	"male bird, fish, or seal; state of being male"	Yugtaanghunghata qaanghitgun kuyngelighaqiit. ‘If they [the caught polar bears] were males they [the hunters] put smoking pipes in their [the bears’] mouths.’ (AKIINGQWAGH. 88)	юхтāнық
yugtaasiq	pos	IPA	lesbian	No information given.	юхтāсиқ
yugtagh-	pos	IPA	to murder	yugtaghtuq ‘he committed murder’; yugtaghaa ‘he murdered him’ /	юхтаӷ-
yugtu-	pos	IPA	to be populous	No information given.	юхту-
yugtuqayuk	pos	IPA	man-eating animal; cannibal	No information given.	юхтуқаюк
yugtuumalghii	pos	IPA	cannibal; foreigner; alien	Chukotkan (V&E)	юхтӯмалӷӣ
yugughte-	pos	IPA	to become a man or a person	No information given.	югуҳты-
yugughtekaq	pos	IPA	middle-aged man	No information given.	югуҳтыкақ
yuguligh-	pos	IPA	to save	used in the translation of the Bible and other religious work; yugulilleq ‘salvation’	югулиӷ-
Yugulighista	pos	IPA	the Saviour	in Bible translation	Югулиӷиста
yugulluk	pos	IPA	sickly person	No information given.	югульюк
yuguma-	pos	IPA	to be or stay alive	No information given.	югума-
yugunqegtaq	pos	IPA	healthy person	No information given.	югунқыхтақ
"yugunqegte-, yugunqegsi-"	pos	IPA	to be healthy	No information given.	"югунқыхты-, югунқыхси-"
"yugunqgusiq, yuguntqgusiq"	pos	IPA	something that insures or contributes to health	"this word has a three- or even four-consonant cluster, which is very uncommon in the language"	"югунқгусиқ, югунтқгусиқ"
yugusiq	pos	IPA	corpse; cadaver; dead body (of person or animal); body of parka minus hood and sleeves	No information given.	югусиқ
yuguyugneq	pos	IPA	arrogant person	No information given.	югуюгнық
yuguyugniqe-	pos	IPA	to be arrogant	No information given.	югуюгниқы-
yugyag-	pos	IPA	for population to increase; for new players to join a game	No information given.	югьяг-
yukaghtaq	pos	IPA	ready-made or store-bought item	No information given.	юкаҳтақ
yukegtaq	pos	IPA	good crewman	No information given.	юкыхтақ
yuknagh-	pos	IPA	to be desirable as a crewman	No information given.	юкньаӷ-
yuksagute-	pos	IPA	to take (him) as a crewman	No information given.	юксягуты-
yukumighte-	pos	IPA	to sit cross-legged	yukumightuq ‘he is sitting cross-legged’ /	юкумиҳты-
yukuta	pos	IPA	dampness; moisture; fog; mist	No information given.	юкута
yukutate-	pos	IPA	to be damp	No information given.	юкутаты-
yulaaq	pos	IPA	insignificant person; lowly man	No information given.	юля̄қ
yulluggaq	pos	IPA	dear little meek man	No information given.	юльюхақ
yulluk	pos	IPA	bad man	No information given.	юльюк
yumi-	pos	IPA	shy; intimidated; cowering	"emotional root; yumiyugtuq ‘he feels shy, intimidated’; yuminaghtuq ‘he is intimidating’; yumikaa or yumiyukaa ‘he feels intimidated by him’; yumitaghtuq ‘he is shy by nature’; = yimi-"	юми-
yumranalu	pos	IPA	tinder; quick-igniting powder	Chukotkan (R)	юмраналю
"yungeltaghhaq*, yungestaq*"	pos	IPA	dwarf (legendary)	No information given.	"юңыльтаҳақ, юңыстақ"
yungllagh-	pos	IPA	to make (create) a man; to carve a figure of a man; to get a crewman	"yungllaghtuq ‘he produced a man, got a crewman’; yungllaghaa ‘he got him as a crewman’ /"	юңльяӷ-
yupallagh-	pos	IPA	to be aging	Chukotkan (R)	юпальаӷ-
yupallagte-	pos	IPA	to become a middle-aged person	Chukotkan (R)	юпальахты-
yupallatangite-	pos	IPA	to be empty of people; to be uninhabited	No information given.	юпальатаңиты-
yupenaaq	pos	IPA	lowly man	No information given.	юпынāқ
Yupigestun	pos	IPA	in the Yupik language	adverbial particle 	Юпигыстун
Yupigti-	pos	IPA	to speak Yupik	yupigtiiq ‘he is speaking Yupik’; Yupigtitaa ‘he is speaking Yupik to her’; many speakers prefer akuzipig- instead for this meaning	Юпихти-
Yupik	pos	IPA	St. Lawrence Island / Siberian Eskimo; honest upright person	No information given.	Юпик
yuqaq	pos	IPA	adult	No information given.	юқақ
yuqeghte-	pos	IPA	to go outside briefly to check weather etc.; to step out for a minute	"yuqeghtuq ‘he stepped out’ / Qenwatlu alla yuqeghsalghiimi, kii, kavighhalaak keneghllak uka unegken. ‘The next time he ventured out and looked toward the sea, he saw a ball of red fire coming  in over the water.’ (SIVUQ. NANGAGH. 3:170)"	юқыҳты-
yuslighaq	pos	IPA	grey whale calf	No information given.	юсльиӷақ
yusqughhaq*	pos	IPA	dwarf (legendary)	No information given.	юсқуҳақ
 yusqungiighhaq	pos	IPA	dwarf (legendary)	No information given.	юсқуңӣҳақ
yusquuvgaghhaq	pos	IPA	very small man	No information given.	юсқӯвгаҳақ
Yuughapaatat	pos	IPA	Youghapotit Rocks off the southern coast of St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Ю̄ӷапāтат
Yuughapak	pos	IPA	Sekinak Lagoon (or the spit between it and the ocean) on St. Lawrence Is.	see Map 5 in Appendices	Ю̄ӷапак
Yuuk Savilek	pos	IPA	the constellation of Orion	literally: ‘man with a knife’	Ю̄к Сявилык
yuuke-	pos	IPA	to be embarrassed by praise	No information given.	ю̄кы-
yuukegtaq	pos	IPA	handsome man	No information given.	ю̄кыхтақ
yuukegte-	pos	IPA	to be handsome	No information given.	ю̄кыхты-
yuungaaghaq*	pos	IPA	jaeger (Stercorarius spp.)	meghem yuungaaghaa ‘pomarine jaeger (Stercorarius pomarinus)’; qutem yuungaaghaa ‘long-tailed jaeger (Stercorarius longicaudus)’	ю̄ңāӷақ
yuungigh-	pos	IPA	"to reduce in size by folding, rolling and/or tying; to lose weight"	yuungightuq ‘he lost weight’; yuungighaa ‘he reduced its size’ / yuungighiiq ‘he reduced the size of something’; cf. yu(u)k	ю̄ңиӷ-
yuutu-	pos	IPA	to be big around the waist; be stout (of a person)	No information given.	ю̄ту-
yuvghiigh-	pos	IPA	to examine; to inspect; to give a medical examination	yuvghiightuq ‘he examinied something’; yuvghiighaa ‘he examined it’ / yuvghiighsightuq ‘he's getting a medical exam’	ювӷӣӷ-
yuvghiighyaghqaq	pos	IPA	magazine (reading material)	"also plural, yuvghiighyaghqat, for one magazine"	ювӷӣӷьяҳқақ
yuwayu	pos	IPA	common loon (Gavia immer)	"more generally, any loon; = yugayu"	юӱаю
ziruliin	pos	IPA	lube oil	No information given.	зирулӣн
